RESEARCH ARTICLE RESEARCH ARTICLE 
CAN ONLINE WAIT BE MANAGED?THE EFFECT OF 
FILLER INTERFACES AND PRESENTATION MODES 
ON PERCEIVED WAITING TIME ONLINE1 


Younghwa Lee 

Department of Management, College of Business Administration, University of Northern Iowa, 
Cedar Falls, IA 50614 U.S.A. {gabe.lee@uni.edu} 


Andrew N. K. Chen 

Accounting and Information Systems, School of Business, University of Kansas, 1300 Sunnyside Avenue, 
Lawrence, KS 66045 U.S.A. {achen@ku.edu} 


Virginia Ilie 

School of Management, California Luthern University, 60 West Olsen Road, 
Thousand Oaks, CA 91360 U.S.A. {ilie.virginia@gmail.com} 


Long waits online undermine users¡¯ evaluations of Websites and their providers, triggering abandonment 
behaviors. Yet e-business researchers and practitioners have not perfected mechanisms to respond to online 
wait issues. A filler interface that runs during the wait for search results may influence online users¡¯ perceived 
waiting time (PWT); however, no scientific investigation has attempted to design effective filler interfaces for 
managing online waits. By adopting resource allocation theory, cognitive absorption theory, and human 
computer interaction (HCI) theories (competition for attention, visual search,and motion effect), we design 
diverse filler interfaces and investigate their effects on antecedents of PWT. The proposed research model 
considers cognitive absorption factors such as temporal dissociation, focused immersion, and heightened 
enjoyment as antecedents of PWT, which in turn triggers three outcomes:affective appraisals, cognitive 
appraisals, and Web site use intention. A multistage, multimethod approach is used to test the research 
hypotheses. In the first stage, we compare a filler interface condition with a no-filler interface condition, and 
find the superiority of a filler interface with respect to inducing focused immersion and temporal dissociation. 
In the second stage, we conduct two controlled experiments to examine whether filler interfaces with various 
designs (varying the presence and relevance of image, text, and image motion) distinctly influence antecedents 
ofPWT and confirm their distinctive effects on focused immersion, temporal dissociation, and heightened 
enjoyment. In addition, by conducting a structural equation modeling analysis, we find that our research model 
explains 51 percent, 51 percent, 44 percent, and 45 percent of the variance inPWT,affective appraisals, 
cognitive appraisals, and Web site use intention respectively. Theoretical and practical implications of these 
findings are provided. 

Keywords: Filler interface, interface design, online wait management, perceived waiting time, cognitive 
absorption, motion effect, competition for attention, visual search, resource allocation 

1Henri Barki was the accepting senior editor for this paper. Hock Chuan Chan served as the associate editor. 
The appendices for this paper are located in the ¡°Online Supplements¡± section of the MIS Quarterly¡¯s website (http://www.misq.org). 


MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2 pp. 365-394/June 2012 365 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Introduction 

Customers not onlydemand quality, they also 

demand speed. They do not tolerate waiting in line 

for long periods of time. 

Katz et al. 1991, p. 44 

Waiting, a pervasive and inseparable component of people¡¯s 
shopping or service-getting experience, negatively affects 
their overall satisfaction with products, services, and stores 
(Rajala and Hantula 2000; Tom and Lucey 1997; Weinberg 
2000).Studies in brick-and-mortar businesses confirm that 
long waiting times create stress and dissatisfaction among 
customers (Pruyn and Smidts 1998). Researchers, therefore, 
proposed various fillers such as music, news bulletins, and 
magazines, which were shown to significantly reduce perceived 
waiting time (PWT) (Antonides et al. 2002;Dellaert 
and Kahn 1999; Katz et al. 1991). 

Waiting also occurs online although online waiting differs 
from traditional waiting in that (1) people have much shorter 
time expectations andare more impatient online, (2) online 
visitors¡¯ PWT can be manipulated with Web site design components, 
and (3) the impact of waiting on evaluations of services 
or merchants may be greater online than in brick-andmortar 
environments. A recent study reports that the maximumtolerable 
waiting time online is only two seconds (Nah 
2004). Long waiting times may be the single greatest problemfor 
e-business, resulting in online customer frustration 
and negativeattitudes, which in turn may cause purchase 
abandonment and customer switching behavior (Dennis and 
Taylor 2006; Galletta et al. 2004;Rajala and Hantula 2000; 
Rose et al. 2005). 

Most studies in the Information Systems domain tackle issues 
of actual waiting and response time by focusingontechnological 
solutions (e.g., Shneiderman andPlaisant 2010). 
While this approach has its contributions by focusing on the 
¡°attributable delay¡± (Rose and Straub 2001; Rose et al. 2005), 
companies can only invest so much in advanced systems, 
servers, databases, and networks (Rose et al. 2005). Thus, the 
online wait problem may not be solved by only using technical 
solutions (Ryan and Valverde 2006). Under these circumstances, 
it becomes crucial for e-businesses to minimize 
not only the objective or actual waiting time but alsotheir 
customers¡¯ perceived waiting time (Dube-Rioux et al. 1989; 
Katz et al. 1991). 

Results from previous research also seem to support the 
importance of considering not only objective (measured) time, 
but alsothe perceived dimension of the wait. For instance, 
Barnett and Saponaro (1985) and Hornik(1984) suggested 

that the length of the wait can be more appropriately measured 
by PWT than by objective waiting time. Other authors 
showed that PWT may be more important than objective time 
in determining customer experience, evaluation, and behavior 
(Barnett and Saponaro 1985; Davis and Vollmann 1990; 
Taylor 1994; Tom and Lucey 1997). In addition, Thompson 
et al. (1996) noted that shorter PWT was associatedwith a 
positive overall satisfaction while actual waiting time was not.
Tom and Lucey (1997) also found that customer satisfaction 
was determined byPWT rather than the objective time. 
Finally, a study by Rose et al. (2005) revealed that the objectivedownload 
delay was not a critical determinant of the 
attitude toward an e-retailer. 

Thus, we choose to focus on PWT (rather than objective time) 
as the construct of interest in an online wait environment. A 
potential means to reducePWT online involves a filler 
interface (Gorn et al. 2004), which is an interface that users 
see while they wait for search results or expected outputs. A 
filler interface can include diverse Web design components 
such as images, text, progress bar, background color, or multimedia,
and is pervasively used in e-business environments, 
especially online travel sites. However, there is currently no 
scientific investigation into the effectiveness of such filler 
interfaces in managing time perceptions online or their design 
characteristics. Therefore, this study tackles the following 
research questions: 

(1) 
Can a filler interface be used to influence PWT in an 
online environment? 
(2) 
If so, what design characteristics of a filler interface can 
be used in order to effectively manipulate users¡¯ perceptions 
of online wait and foster positive evaluations of the 
Web site? 
With this objective, we first build a research model by integrating 
multiple theories: resource allocation (Zakay 1989; 
Zakay and Hornik 1991), cognitive absorption (Agarwal and 
Karahanna 2000), and human¨Ccomputerinteraction (HCI) 
theories, namely competition for attention (Janiszewski 1998), 
visual search (Bacon and Egeth 1994; Folk et al. 1992; Yantis 
and Egeth 1999), and motion effect (Ball and Tronick 1971; 
Barten et al. 1971; Detenber et al. 1998; Simons et al. 2000; 
Simons et al. 1999). Second, using these theoretical lenses, 
we propose that when users see a well-designed filler interface, 
they can reach a state of deep involvement with the 
interface (called cognitive absorption) which directly impacts 
their PWT. We develop hypotheses for investigating the 
effects of the presence and various designs of filler interfaces 
on cognitive absorption factors such as focused immersion, 
temporal dissociation, and heightened enjoyment. We then 

366 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


examine the nomological network of these constructs, PWT, 
and overallevaluations of a Web site. In order to test the 
proposed hypotheses and validate our research model, we 
develop a simulated online travelsite with diverse filler 
interfaces in three controlled experiments. Texts and images 
are used as design components, which we manipulate with 
regard to their presence, level of relevance, and image motion. 
Results fromthree controlled experiments as well as the structural 
equation model analysis are presented and elaborated. 
Finally, we discuss theoretical contributions, practical implications, 
and future research directions from our findings. 

Theoretical Background 

We build our study around three theoretical bases: resource 
allocation theory, cognitive absorption theory, and three HCI 
theories, namely competition for attention theory, visual 
search theory, and motion effect theory. We describe each 
theory in detail in the following sections. 

Resource Allocation Theory 

Resource allocation theory (Kahneman 1973; Zakay 1989) is 
rooted in a viewwhere there is a limited pool of processing 
resources (i.e., attention, capacity, or cognitive effort) possessed 
by humans (Hirst and Kalmar 1987; Kahneman 1973; 
McNeil et al. 1991; Navon and Gopher 1979). The premise 
of the theory is that individuals are naturally occupied with 
the passage of time and actively engage in time estimation 
during the entire waiting period. In other words, people perceive 
longer wait duration if they paymoreattention to the 
wait and their time is not ¡°filled¡± (Maister 1985). Meanwhile, 
if nontemporal objects (or stimuli) are introduced during the 
wait, people allocate a certainamount of resources to processing 
and reacting to the stimuli, which results in reduced 
resource allocation for time estimation (Zakay 1989). That is, 
if more nontemporal information processing (distracter or 
stimulus) is required, a person allocates fewer resources 
(attention) to the temporal information and vice versa. 

Researchers (e.g., Taylor 1994) actively applied this theory 
for predicting customers¡¯ estimation of wait (delay) duration. 
They noted that providingindividuals with feedback or 
various stimuli by fillingthe waiting time can distract their 
attention from the passage oftimeand the duration of an 
event (Baker and Cameron 1996; Gorn et al. 2004; Zviran et 
al. 2006). This is becauseprovision of such stimuli leads 
individuals to allocate more cognitive resources for processing 
the stimuli-related information rather than actual time 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

estimation (Zakay and Hornik 1991). Hence, less attention is 
paid to the wait itself, which results in shorter time estimates. 
Several studies validated this theory in various contexts such 
as telephone waiting and delayed flights(Antonides et al. 
2002; Dellaert and Kahn 1999; Katz et al. 1991; Taylor 1994), 
and download delay on the Internet (Rose et al. 2005). 

Cognitive Absorption Theory 

A rather new theoretical perspective that explains online 
users¡¯ holistic experiences with using new technologies is 
cognitive absorption theory (Agarwal and Karahanna 2000). 
Cognitive absorption theory is rootedin psychological 
theories that conceptualize absorption as a trait (Tellegen 
1982), theory of flow (Csikszentmihalyi 1990), and cognitive 
engagement theory (Webster and Ho1997). Agarwal and 
Karahanna (2000) integrated these theoretical bases and 
further explored the realm of cognitive absorption in an online 
environment. As opposed to past conceptualizations of 
absorption asa trait, Agarwal and Karahanna (2000) view 
cognitive absorption as a state which captures the essence of 
an individual¡¯s subjective experiences and which can be an 
outcomeof a particular configuration of individual and situational 
factors (p. 668). In their view, cognitive absorption is 
¡°a state of deep involvement with software¡± (p. 665). Cognitive 
absorption captures the totality of an individual¡¯s 
experience with new technologies and is likely to be achieved 
with hedonic technologies that are¡°visually rich and appealing¡± 
(Agarwal and Karahanna 2000, p. 688), which is the 
case of many Web interfaces. 

Cognitive absorption in an online environment encompasses 
five dimensions (Agarwal and Karahanna 2000): (1) temporal 
dissociation, (2) focused attention, (3) heightened enjoyment, 

(4) control, and (5) curiosity. Temporal dissociation refers to 
an individual¡¯s inability to register the passage of time while 
engaged in an activity. Focused immersion represents an 
experience of total engagement, where other attentional 
demands are rather ignored. Heightened enjoyment captures 
the pleasurable aspects of the interaction while control represents 
a user¡¯s perception of being in charge of the interaction. 
Finally, curiosity refers to the extent to which the experience 
arouses an individual¡¯s sensory and cognitive curiosity. 
Previous research shows that cognitive absorption successfully 
predicts individuals¡¯ IT acceptancebehaviors. For 
example, cognitive absorption was found to have positive 
associations with perceived usefulness and perceived ease-ofuse 
while using the World Wide Web (Agarwal andKarahanna 
2000). Saade and Bahli (2005) definedcognitive 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 367 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

absorption as time distortion, focused immersion, and 
heightened enjoyment, and noted its positive influence on 
perceived usefulness and ease-of-use on Internet-based 
learning systems. In a virtual teamenvironment, Rutkowski 
et al. (2007) found that teams with focused immersion and 
time distortion showed high performance. Finally, Roca et al. 
(2006) identified a significant influence of cognitive absorption 
on e-learning service satisfaction. 

While several studies used the construct of cognitive absorption 
to investigate outcomes such as acceptance and performance, 
few studies looked at the actual formation of cognitive 
absorption perceptions. In fact, Agarwal and Karahanna 
strongly advised researchers to further their inquiry into the 
nomological net of cognitive absorption in order to identify 
other predictors of cognitive absorption (p. 687). They also 
suggested more research focus on measuring cognitive 
absorption during usability testing of Web sites in lab settings 

(p. 689). In this study, we center our inquiry on the first three 
dimensions of cognitive absorption theory since the latter two 
dimensions do not correspond to our proposed model.2 
HCI Theories: Competition for Attention,
Visual Search, and Motion Effect 

Researchers in the HCI domain have a long history of investigating 
designs of usable interfaces (Morrison and Vogel 
1998), Web sites (Nielsen 2000), andvirtual worlds (Lee et 
al. 2009). This study refers to three relevant HCI theories¡ª 
namely, competition for attention, visual search, and motion 
effect¡ªto provide the theoretical foundation for the design of 
various filler interfaces and hypotheses formulation in our 
study. These theories are based on the notion that individuals 
have a limited amount of attention and information processing 
capabilities available (Kahneman 1973) and they selectively 
process information by responding to various stimuli in their 
visual field (Van der Heijden 1992). Attention, however, can 
be influenced by provision of various stimuli. As a response 
to stimuli, individuals develop an ¡°orienting response¡± 
(Ohman 1977) that holds attention if the stimuli are different 
from others (Janiszewski 1998), relevant to the task (Yantis 
and Egeth1999), or moving (Nielsen 2000). Each of the 
theories we discuss below provides us with a basis for understanding 
the various stimuli that may capture and hold users¡¯ 

2We did not include perceived uncertainty and control because they were not 
appropriate for this studycontext where (1) wait duration is very short; 

(2) wait duration information is not provided; and (3) participants of controlled 
experimentsinherently expect to see search results instead of being 
concerned about not seeing the search results. 
368 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 

attentionwhen placed on filler interfaces, thus influencing 
waiting time perceptions. 

Competition for attention theory (Janiszewski 1998) states 
that focal and non-focal objects compete for attention within 
an individual¡¯s visual field. When an object is the focus of 
attention, other objects will constantly compete for attention 
with the focal object. This theory is rooted in the physiology 
of the human visual system with emphasis on where visual 
receptors are located on the retina and how they process 
information froma focus area. Thus, humans¡¯ visual system 
recognizes differences in the intensity of signals generated by 
objects located within their visual field (Janiszewski 1998; 
Steinman and Levinson 1990). Because human attention span 
is limited (Woodside and Clokey 1974), more attention-
getting objects would determine focused attention (Hong et al. 
2005; Janiszewski 1998). Salience and distance of an object 
from the visual field determine the amount of attention an 
object receives. As objects are located further away fromthe 
visual point of focus, they become harder to see and therefore 
less likely to compete for attention. Increased salience of the 
visual object (e.g., contrast, size, layout, and content), however, 
maximizes the likelihood an object will be selected for 
viewing (Janiszewski 1998). 

A salient visual object is one that can be efficiently detected 
in visual search (Yantis and Egeth 1999). Hence salience can 
be granted by any feature or stimulus that is perceivedas 
locally unique in the visual field (Yantis and Egeth 1999). 
Color, size, orientation, and motion are examplesof such 
stimuli. For example, researchers in experimental psychology 
(e.g., Yantis and Jonides 1984) found evidence that a target 
with distinct characteristics captured more attention and 
detection faster when the target was distinct from others (e.g., 
a sudden-onset). Todd and Kramer (1994) also found that 
uniquely colored or luminous letters can capture more 
attention in a search task. 

In sum, competition for attention theory suggests that by 
manipulating various stimuli, a visual object can receive more 
attention than others. It alsosuggests that attention is captured 
solelybythe properties of the stimulus, even if the 
stimulus is irrelevant to the task at hand. This theory can be 
applied in a Web environment in order to understand how 
visual design stimuli on a filler interface may shift individuals¡¯ 
attention to a focal point on the interface targeted by 
the stimuli. Only a few researchers applied this theory in IS 
(Hong et al. 2005; JiangandBenbasat 2007) and found a 
significant effect of visual presentation formats in interface 
design on performance measures (information search time and 
recall) as well as attitudes toward the Web site. Jiang and 


Benbasat (2007) also found significant influence of salient 
presentation modes of the products on perceived diagnosticity 
and focused attention. They found that themore interactive 
and vivid the images of products, the more favorable the 
attitudes toward the Web site and its products. 

Visual search theory (Bacon and Egeth 1994; Folk et al. 1992; 
Yantis and Egeth 1999) challenges the view that attention is 
directed in a pure stimulus-driven fashion. Various authors in 
experimental psychology distinguish between stimulus-driven 
attentional guidance andgoal-directed attentional guidance 
(Bacon and Egeth 1992; Hillstrom and Yantis 1994). 
Stimulus-driven attentional guidance occurs when attention is 
drawn to a stimulus that is task-irrelevant. On the other hand, 
goal-directed attentional guidance occurs when individuals 
shift their attention to an object in their visual field based on 
task characteristics.Visual search theory postulates that 
individuals selectively allocate their attention into processing 
information in their visual field (e.g., user interfaces) based 
not only on the salience of the objects presented to them but 
most importantly on their perceived relevance to a search 
task. Specifically, visual search theorists note that object 
salience alone (e.g., contrast, color, size, movement) is not 
sufficient in drawing users¡¯ attention. The object of attention 
also needs to beperceived as relevant to the search task. In 
other words, individuals may ignore visually salient objects 
on Websites if they perceive them to be irrelevant to their 
tasks. 

Various researchers in experimental psychology support this 
claim. For instance, Yantis and Egeth (1999) found that in 
visual search, search efficiency increased with the degree of 
useful information provided about the stimulus as well as its 
visual salience. Folk et al. (1992) argued that attention shifts 
can never completely be stimulus-drivenbecause they are 
modulated by an individual¡¯s attentional control setting which 
is a ¡°function of currentbehavioral goals¡± (p. 1041). They 
suggested that shifts of attention are critically dependent on 
the relationship between the stimulus properties and task 
demands(p. 1030). Very few researchers in IS used this 
theory to investigate online user behaviors (Hong et al. 2005). 
In the context of our study, this theory provides important 
insights into including task-relevant text and images on filler 
interfaces and investigating their impact on waiting time 
perceptions. 

Motion effect theory is grounded in neurological science and 
biological mechanisms of human information processing. 
Motion constitutes a fundamental aspect of the physical world 
and the human brain has specialized nerve cells that detect 
and process motion (Anstis et al. 1998;Goldstein 1989; 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Spilman 1999). Motion detection is a biological enduring 
disposition (Hong et al. 2007), which is the direct result of 
humans¡¯ innate predisposition for moving objects (Ball and 
Tronick 1971; Barten et al. 1971). In essence, this theory predicts 
that as compared to static images, moving images 
capture more attentional and emotional resources (Detenber 
et al. 1998; Diao and Sundar 2004; Fasolo et al. 2006; Hong 
et al. 2007; Simons et al. 2000; Simon et al. 1999) because 
motion continuously presents individuals with new information. 
Moving images have also anoverwhelming effect on 
human peripheralvision (Girelli and Luck 1997). Hence a 
stimulus that moves within the peripheral vision attracts 
attention quickly (Nielsen 2000) because the stimulus disturbs 
the systems¡¯ equilibrium (Goldstein 1989). As a result, there 
is a sudden attention shift or ¡°orienting response¡± (Lang 
1990) including an eye fixation on the locus of change 
(Goldstein 1989). The ¡°oriented response¡± caused by moving 
images can take two forms:(1) more focused user attention 
on the moving object (Diao and Sundar 2004; Fasolo et al. 
2006; Hong et al. 2005, 2007) and (2) emotional responses 
including both self-reported arousal (or excitement) and 
physiological emotions as measured by a sudden deceleration 
of heart rate or an increase in skin conductance (Detenber et 
al. 1998; Ravaja 2004; Simons et al. 2000; Simon et al. 1999). 

Researchers in marketing and Web advertising have adopted 
this theory in the context of moving (or animated) images on 
Web interfaces. For instance, Diao and Sundar (2004) found 
that stimuli suchas pop-up ads elicited orienting responses 
more than static ads. They concluded thatpeople are apt to 
orient automatically toward mediated objects that are novel in 
the immediate visual domain (p. 556). Phillips and Lee (2005) 
investigated the effect of using animated spokes-characters 
(animated beings or objects usedtopromote a product or 
service) in Internet advertising and found that animation 
increased character liking and perceived entertainment, and 
fostered positive attitudes toward the Web site. Other authors 
in marketing showed that displaying a product in an animated 
format favored its choice over a product presented in a static 
format (e.g., Fasoloet al. 2006). In addition, researchers in 
communication and mass-media showed that messages 
delivered by a moving-face newscaster were associated with 
greater emotional arousal than the ones delivered statically 
(Ravaja 2004). 

A few researchers in IS have investigatedthe effects of 
moving images (or animation) in information search and 
browsing activities (Hong et al. 2005, 2007; Lai et al. 2009). 
In these studies, moving images were conceptualized as 
banner ad animations (Bayles 2002; Burke et al. 2005), non-
banner ad animations on Web pages (Hong et al. 2007), and 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 369 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

flash (Hong et al. 2005; Lai et al. 2009). Generally,these 
studies found that animation attracted Web users¡¯ attention 
(Hong et al. 2007). 

Hypotheses Development, Research 
Methodology, and Results 

The theories presented earlier provide us with a firm foundation 
for exploring alternative filler interface designs and 
evaluating their effectiveness on PWT during online waits. 
However, because of scarcity of past empirical studies in the 
areas of filler interfaces and online timeperceptions, we 
decided to adopt a more conservative, two-step approach to 
build and validate our main researchhypotheses. As a first 
step in this direction, we conductedan initial exploratory 
study (Study 1) to establish whether the presenceofa filler 
interface significantly affects online users¡¯ cognitive absorption 
perceptions, particularly focused immersion and temporal 
dissociation. Secondly, given significant findings from Study 
1 (strong and significant filler interface presence effect), we 
designed two subsequent experimental studies (Study 2 and 
Study 3) to test finer grained hypotheses regardingalternate 
designs in filler interfaces and their impacts on users¡¯ cognitive 
time perceptions online. Finally, we conducted a nomological 
network analysis in order to examine hypotheses 
related to the effects of filler interfaces on cognitive absorption 
dimensions, perceived waiting time online, attitudes, and 
Web site use intention. The hypotheses, research design, and 
results of each study are described in the next sections. 
Table 1 provides a summary for the designsof each of the 
three experimental studies. 

First Stage: Validate the Presence 
Effect of a Filler Interface 

Study 1: Research Hypotheses 

Before we explore the various design characteristics of filler 
interfaces, we seek to investigate whether the presence of the 
filler interface itself has an impact on cognitiveabsorption 
dimensions such as focused immersion and temporal dissociation. 


Focused immersionis an experience of total engagement 
where other attentional demands are essentially ignored 
(Agarwal and Karahanna 2000) and a person gives full 
attention to the task in which he is involved (Shin 2006). This 
state of immersion in an activityissometimes referred to as 

370 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 

¡°focused attention¡± (Shin 2006). Generally, during waits, 
time is perceived as passingmore slowly (Block 1990) if an 
individual¡¯s attention is focused primarily on time rather than 
anything else (e.g., other stimuli). Competition for attention 
theory supports the assertion that various stimuli (e.g., a filler 
interface) can focus online users¡¯ attention (Janiszewski 
1998). Based on this theory, provision of a filler interface 
during online waits will focus users¡¯ attention such that the 
filler interface receives more attention than other competing 
objects in the visual environment. This claimwas also supported 
in online e-business contexts (Hong et al. 2005). 
Hence, we propose that in online wait contexts, the presence 
of a filler interface equipped with various visual cues will 
shift users¡¯ attention away from the wait itself and create a 
feeling of focused immersion in the interaction with the filler. 
Thus, we propose the following: 

H1a: Web sites with filler interfaces will create more 

focused immersion than Web sites without filler 

interfaces. 

Temporal dissociation refers to users¡¯ inability to register the 
passage of time while engaged in the interaction with the filler 
interface (Agarwal and Karahanna 2000). Consistent with 
resource allocation theory and competitionfor attention 
theory, providing individuals with stimuli (e.g., filler interface) 
during online waits can cause them to concentrate on the 
interaction with the stimuli andresults in their inability to 
recognize the passage of time (Hui and Tse 1996; Janiszewski 
1998; Zakay 1989; Zakay and Hornick 1991). For instance, 
in a physical service environment, various fillers (e.g., room 
decorations, background music, magazines, TV, or video) 
were found to distract individuals¡¯ attention frompassage of 
time (Antonides et al. 2002; Dellaert and Kahn 1999; Katz et 
al. 1991). In addition, competition for attention theory implies 
that provision of a filler interface as a focal stimulus 
during online waits may shift individuals¡¯ attention toward the 
filler stimulus. Thus, in the competition for attention process 
between the focal filler interface stimulus and other objects in 
the visual environment, the filler interface tends to gain more 
attention. Such filler interface stimuli provided to users 
during online waits can also contribute to the perception that 
the time interval is ¡°filled¡± (Maister 1985), thus creating 
temporal dissociation. In other words, provision of a filler 
interface can ¡°fill¡± the time between users entering a search 
term and waiting for the outcome by attracting their attention 
to the information presented on the interface which in turn can 
result in distracted attention from the online wait. Thus, we 
propose that Web siteswith filler interfaces will help create 
more temporal dissociation from wait than sites without such 
filler interfaces. This logic is reflected in H1b: 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Table 1. Summary of Study Designs 
Experiments Study 1 Study 2 Study 3 Structural Equation Model 
Objective Examine the presence 
effect of a filler 
interface 
Examine the presence 
effect of image and text 
in a filler interface 
Examine the effect of 
the relevance of image 
and text, and the image 
motion 
Examine the nomological 
network between the antecedents 
of PWT, PWT, and 
overall Web experience 
Subject Business school 
students (n = 112) 
Business school 
students (n = 127) 
Business school 
students (n = 228) 
Business school students 
(n = 355; pool the data of 
study 2 and 3) 
Independent 
Variables 
(Exogenous) 
Presence of a filler 
interface 
Presence of image 
Presence of text 
Relevance of image 
Relevance of text 
Image motion 
TD, FI, HE 
Dependent 
Variables 
(Endogenous) 
TD, FI TD, FI TD, FI, HE PWT 
CA, AA, UI 
Method Controlled Experiment Controlled Experiment Controlled Experiment Structural Equation Model 
Analysis 

TD: Time Dissociation; FI: Focused Immersion;HE: Heightened Enjoyment; PWT: Perceived Waiting Time; CA: Cognitive Appraisals; AA: 
Affective Appraisals; UI: Use Intention 

H1b: Web sites with filler interfaces will create more 

temporal dissociation than Web sites without filler 

interfaces. 

Study 1: Research Method and Procedure 

The goal of Study 1 is to examine the effectiveness of filler 
interfaces in an online wait context. Specifically, we seek to 
demonstrate that showing online users a filler interface while 
waiting for search results leads them to perceive higher 
focused immersion and temporal dissociation than waiting 
without seeing a filler interface. To test this thesis, we conducted 
a controlled experiment in order to examine the effect 
of the presence of a filler interface. We employedthis 
approach because a well-designed lab experiment using actual 
controls can lead to a deeper understanding of the fundamental 
principles of humaninteraction with computers (Rajala 
and Hantula 2000; Shneiderman and Plaisant 2010). 

We designed a simulated online travel Web site for airline 
ticket purchases (see sample interfaces in Appendix A). Our 
online travel site, TravelDepot, mimicked major online travel 
sites. Except for the no-filler interface condition (which only 
included an inputandan output screen), all experimental 
conditions included an input screen, a filler interface, and an 
output screen. All screens were designed with a blue-colored 
background which was deemed to provide the greatest 
relaxation in both physical and online environments (Gorn et 
al. 2004). 

The simulated travel site used in this experiment was designed 
to work as follows. An input screen contained two main 
drop-down boxes for the departure city (Kansas City) and 
destination (Las Vegas). In order to control the experimental 
conditions, only these two cities were included on the site. 
After entering all inputs including departure and return date 
and number of passengers, users clicked the ¡°Find Flight¡± 
button to start the search process. In all scenarios other than 
the ¡°no filler¡± one, a filler interface was shown to users during 
the 16-second wait duration.3 An output screen followed the 
filler interface which showed users various flight schedules. 
Each subject selected a flight option by clicking the ¡°Select 
This Flight¡± button which in turn triggered a questionnaire. 

In order to recruit subjects for this experiment, we distributed 
fliers and class announcements to business school students at 
a large public midwestern U.S. university who had at least a 
one-time online purchase experience through an online travel 
site. Of the 132 subjects recruited, 15 students did not show 
up for the experiment, and 5 did not successfully complete the 
survey, leaving a total of 112 usable responses (response rate 
= 85%). The participants¡¯ mean age was 20.5 years (SD = 

3.4 years) and 55 percent were females. They had an average 
3For setting the waiting time in our experiments, we randomly created 100 
scenarios of travel search with different departing dates, arrival dates, 
departure places, arrival places, and number of passengers. Next we assessed 
the average waiting time by entering this search informationinto four 
commercial travel search Web sites, which provided an average waiting time 
of 16.5 seconds (SD = 5.62). 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 371 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

of 6.7 years Internet use experience and 4 times online travel 
site use experience. The participation was voluntary, 
although students could earn class participation points and an 
opportunity to win a sweepstake (small cash prize) in return 
for their participation. 

Each participant arrived at the computer lab at a designated 
time. Two different TravelDepot Web applications (with and 
without a filler interface) were installed on 32 PCs in a 
computer lab. Participantswere instructed to complete the 
input screen (including the departure city, destination, date, 
time, and number of passengers), wait, and then review the 
results. The filler interface was designed to include one 
image (e.g.,flight attendant) and one piece of text. The 
selected image and text were similar to the ones most often 
used in commercial online travel sites (e.g., ¡°TravelDepot 
always strives to offer the best price and flight selectionfor 
customers like you. Please wait while we are searching for 
your flights.Thank you very much.¡±). The length of text 
(approximately 30 words)was determined by averaging the 
length of text shown in filler interfaces of various commercial 
sites. In the case of the no-filler interface condition, users 
waited for the search results while seeing the original Travel 
Depot input screen. Participants were randomly assigned to 
a filler interface condition (n = 57) and a no-filler condition 
(n = 55). The total amount of time required to complete the 
task was no more than 30 minutes. 

Out of the five variables introduced incognitive absorption 
theory, focused immersion and temporal dissociation were 
selected astwodependent variables for Study 1. Curiosity, 
perceived control, and heightened enjoyment were not appropriate 
for this study because (1) wait duration was very short, 

(2) wait duration information was not provided, and (3) the 
filler interfaces contained generic images/text which would 
not elicit hedonic perceptions. 
Based on our literature review, we identified four focused 
immersion items from Agarwal and Karahanna¡¯s (2000) study 
(see a list of instrument items in Appendix B).In order to 
ensure contentvalidity, items were pretested with eight 
experts, consisting of faculty members, doctoral students, and 
customers using online travel sites. Subsequently, some 
modifications were made to the wording and format of the 
instrument. 

Study 1: Analysis of Psychometric 
Properties and Results 

We conducted an exploratory factor analysis in order to 

(1) determine the psychometric properties of the instrument 
for focused immersion and temporal dissociation, and 
372 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 

(2) investigate the convergent and discriminant validity and 
reliability. As shown in Table 2, the items measuring the 
same construct correlated with oneanother, and their factor 
loading scores were all greater than .7, in support of convergent 
validity. All Eigenvalues of the constructs were greater 
than 1 (FI = 5.01,TD= 2.32). Further, all items correlated 
more closely withother items intended to measure the same 
factor than with items used to measure a different construct, 
providing evidence of construct validity. Finally, all constructs 
exhibited Cronbach¡¯s alphas greater than .916, which 
demonstrate adequate reliability. 
A MANOVA test was conducted to examine the effect of the 
presence of a fillerinterface on temporal dissociation and 
focused immersion. We found a significant effect of the 
presence of a filler interface (Wilks¡¯ ¦Ë=14.361, p < .001). 
This result implies that a Web site with a filler interface 
performed better than one without such an interface in terms 
of drawing users¡¯ attention while waiting, as well as inducing 
perceptions that time passed faster. SubsequentANOVA 
tests showed that participants in the filler interface condition 
perceived significantly higher levels of focused immersion 
(MeanF = 4.25, MeanNF = 2.98, F = 33.04, p< .001) and 
temporal dissociation (MeanF = 3.91, MeanNF = 3.01, F = 
18.81, p < .001) than those in the no-filler interface condition. 
Thus, H1 was supported. Once the presence effect of a filler 
interface was established, we proceeded to the second stage 
and conducted Study 2 and Study 3 to further explore the 
various designs of filler interfaces and their impact on wait 
perceptions online. 

Second Stage: Validate Effects of Diverse 
Filler Interface Designs on Time Perceptions 

Encouraged by the significant findings fromStudy 1 showing 
a strong presence effect of a filler interface in manipulating 
cognitive absorption perceptions online, weattempt to 
investigate further alternate designs of afiller interface and 
their subsequent impacts. From the theoretical bases presented 
earlier, we examine diverse filler interface designs by 
manipulating the presence and relevance of images and text 
and image motion. We develop and test hypotheses regarding 
the effects of the manipulated filler interfaces on online users¡¯ 
cognitive absorption dimensions (in particular, focused 
immersion, temporal dissociation, and heightened enjoyment) 
through two experimental studies (Study 2 and Study 3). We 
conduct a nomological analysis to examine relationships 
between diverse filler interfaces designs, cognitive absorption 
dimensions, PWT, attitudes (both cognitive and affective 
appraisals), and Web site use intention (see the research 
model in Figure 1). The relationships proposed in the model 
are explained in detail below. 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Table 2. Study 1: Exploratory Factor Analysis 
Component 
FI TD 
FI1 .179 .902 
FI2 .159 .917 
FI3 .144 .954 
FI4 .214 .928 
TD1 .804 .278 
TD2 .840 .190 
TD3 .875 .092 
TD4 .884 .115 
TD5 .851 .156 

Image 
Text 
Image Only 
Text Only 
No Image 
& NoText 
Yes No 
Text 
HR Image 
HR Text 
HR Image 
LR Text 
LR Image 
HR Text 
LR Image 
LR Text 
High Low 
Text 
Static Move 
MANOVA 
H2-3 
H4-6 
H7 
Image 
Presence of Image & Text 
Image 
Relevance of Image & Text 
Image Motion 
High YesNoLow 
Temporal 
Dissociation 
Focused 
Immersion 
Heightened 
Enjoyment 
Affective 
Appraisals 
Perceived 
Waiting Time 
Cognitive 
Appraisals 
SEM 
Use 
Intention 
H8a 
H8b 
H8c H9a 
H9b 
H10a 
H10b 
H11 
H12a 
H12b 
* H2 and H3 do not measure Heightened Enjoyment 
Figure 1. Research Model 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 373 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Study 2: Research Hypotheses¡ªPresence 
of Image/Text 

Prior research using resource allocation theory suggested that 
the provision of cues (e.g., magazines, music, etc.) can 
successfully attract users¡¯ attention and cause themto become 
unconscious of the passage of time in various wait contexts 
such as banking, telephone calls, restaurants, hospitals, and 
delayed flights (Antonides et al. 2002; Dellaert and Kahn 
1999; Katz et al.1991; Taylor 1994). Such cues constitute 
distractions that cause individuals to perceive shorter time 
durations (Durrande-Moreau 1999; Pruyn andSmidts 1998; 
Ryan and Valverde 2006; Taylor 1994). 

In filler interface design, cues such as image and text are pervasively 
used in commercial Web sites for achieving similar 
goals (including online advertising). Such textual or image 
cues are salient visual stimuli that can be detected efficiently 
in the visual domain (Yantis and Egeth 1999), thus impacting 
waiting time perceptions. Researchers in the marketing field 
also investigated the effects of text and images as stimuli in 
advertising. For instance,Rosbergen et al. (1997) designed 
four stimuli for a shampoo ad, namely body text, 
image/picture (female with long hair), headline, and packshot 
(generic shampoo bottle). Therefore, these reasons prompt us 
toinvestigate the presence of text/image as cues in filler 
interface design and examine their impacts on online waits. 

Researchers in HCI and experimental psychology (Janiszewski 
1998; Todd and Kramer 1994; Yantis and Egeth 1999; 
Yantis andJonides 1984) suggest a significant influence of 
visual cues in user interface design on drawing users¡¯ attention. 
They point out that anartifact with distinct salient 
characteristics (e.g., text, images, or both) is highly likely to 
be selected for viewing and captures more attention than other 
competing artifacts on user interfaces. In addition, Morrison 
and Vogel (1998) found that visual presentations with images 
and text attracted customers¡¯ attention more significantly (i.e., 
higher focused immersion). Other researchers (Appiah 2006; 
Chaiken and Eagly 1983; Greenwald and Leavitt 1984; Jiang 
and Benbasat 2005) found that images and text can attract and 
hold users¡¯ attention. Thus, we propose that online users who 
encounter a filler interface with visual cues will be more 
immersed in the interaction as compared to thosewho 
encounter a filler interface without these cues. H2reflects 
this logic. 

H2: Filler interfaces with visual design cues lead to higher 
focused immersion than no-filler interface. 

In addition, based on competition for attention theory, we can 
expect that a filler interface with visual elements (text, 

374 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 

images, or both) will direct individuals¡¯ cognitive attention 
toward the visual stimuli presented on the interface, hence 
creating a temporal dissociation. This is because, asthe 
theory suggests, salience of an object within the visual field 
determines the amount of attention an object receives. In 
addition,when an object is in focal attention (based on 
stimuli), the human visual system recognizes differences in 
the intensity of signals generated by the focal object in the 
visual field (Janiszewski 1998; Steinman and Levinson 1990) 
and ignores all other competing objects (e.g., waiting time). 
As human attention span is limited (Woodside and Clokey 
1974), salient design elements on filler interfaces (text/image) 
can becomeattention-getting objects and thus create temporal 
dissociation from the passage of time (Zakay 1989). 

Thereby, weposit that online users who encounter a filler 
interface with visual design cues (such as text, images, or 
both) willbe less occupied with the actual passage of time 
and will perceive more temporal dissociation as compared to 
individualswho interact with an interface that lacks such 
visual cues. Thus, we formalize H3: 

H3: Filler interfaces with visualdesign cues lead to higher 
temporal dissociation than no-filler interface. 

Study 3: Research Hypotheses¡ªRelevance 
of Image/Text, Image Motion 

According to visual search theory,the relevance of text and 
images on filler interfaces can also play a major role in 
influencing time perceptions during online waits. Based on 
the level of relevance, we distinguish two types of text/ 
images: generic and relevant. Generic text/images are those 
that do not deliver direct, beneficial information to their 
viewers and are task-irrelevant (Bacon and Egeth 1994). 
From our observation of commercial Web sites, most of them 
primarily use generic images and/or text on their filler interfaces. 
For example, inclusion of a flight attendant image or 
company logo on the filler interface of a travel Web site does 
not provide customers with specific valuable information. In 
contrast, relevant text/images on filler interfaces are directly 
associated with the online search goals and are relevant to the 
tasks users undertake (Bacon and Egeth 1994). For instance, 
a filler interface with text or images related to the destination 
of a flight search provides relevant information for users¡¯ 
goals. Few IS researchers distinguished between task-
relevant and task-irrelevant online search contexts (e.g., Hong 
et al. 2005). In this study, we investigate the effects of both 
generic (task-irrelevant) and relevant text/images asdesign 
characteristics of filler interfaces onusers¡¯ perceptions of 
online wait. 


Researchers using visual search theory (Honget al. 2005; 
Hillstorm and Yantis 1994; Lamy and Tsal 1999) suggested 
that salient objects draw users¡¯attention only when they are 
perceived as relevantto their tasks. Other authors found 
similar results. For example, Petty et al. (1983) suggest that 
people are motivated to exert more cognitive effort (involvement) 
when the relevance of the message is high. Similarly, 
Park and Young (1986) argue that when people find information 
to be personally relevant, they devote considerably more 
attentional capacity to process that information at a deeper 
level. 

Relevant design elements can also create feelings of focused 
immersion in the interaction with the interface by attracting 
users¡¯ attention and engaging them in processing the relevant 
information. As previously noted, simple stimuli (such as text 
or images) may not be sufficient to attract users¡¯ attention. 
Visual search theorists suggest thatattention shifts are critically 
dependent on the relationship between the stimulus 
properties and task demands (Folk et al. 1992, p. 1030). 
Task-relevant stimuli on filler interfaces can provide goal-
directed attentional guidance (Bacon and Egeth 1994; Hillstromand 
Yantis 1994) during online waits and, in some 
cases, override stimulus-driven attentional guidance (Bacon 
and Egeth 1994; Hillstorm and Yantis 1994; Yantis and Egeth 
1999). In addition, the relevant characteristics of the interface 
may also induce a state of deep immersion with the filler 
interface since the visual stimuli provided on the filler interface 
are directly related to individuals¡¯ behavioral goals (Folk 
et al. 1992). Thus, we believe that relevantdesign elements 
on filler interfaces can stimulate people to involve in processing 
those elements (Novak et al. 2000) and contribute to 
creating a state of focused immersion. Hence, we propose 
H4: 

H4: Filler interfaces with relevant design characteristics lead 

to higher focused immersion than fillerinterfaces with 

generic design characteristics. 

As discussed previously, we capture the relevancy of visual 
stimuli on a filler interface according to whether they are 
pertinent to the information retrieval experience (taskrelevant). 
Such relevant textual information or images should 
draw individuals¡¯ attention and distract themfrom the actual 
time passage (i.e., temporal dissociation) (Hillstrom and 
Yantis 1994; Lamy and Tsal 1999). Therefore, we propose 
that filler interfaces with relevant cues will create more 
temporal dissociation for an individual than interfaces with 
generic cues. H5 is formalized as follows: 

H5: Filler interfaces with relevant design characteristics lead 

to higher temporal dissociation than filler interfaces with 

generic design characteristics. 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

In addition, provision of relevant text or image(s) on the filler 
interface can make the waiting experiencemore enjoyable 
because users perceive pleasantness when they observe the 
relevant images or read the relevant text that match their 
search goals. Previous studies suggested that by filling the 
waiting time with various stimuli, individuals will experience 
less anger because of the wait (Taylor 1994) and will also be 
in a more positive mood (Cameron et al.2003). In contrast, 
boredom may arise when individuals do not get enough 
interesting information (Klapp 1986). North et al. (1999) 
suggested that providing individuals with engaging content 
during waits or stimuli that fit individuals¡¯ expectations could 
make the waiting experience more interesting. Finally, 
Cameron et al. (2003) found that fillers such as musicpositively 
influenced affective reactions during waits. Weargue 
that task-relevant information on filler interfaces constitutes 
an engaging content which creates heightened enjoyment 
during online waits. 

Inline with these arguments, we posit that relevant design 
elements on filler interfaces can produce a pleasurable and 
entertaining experience during online waits. We thus 
hypothesize: 

H6: Filler interfaces with relevant design characteristics lead 
to more heightened enjoyment than filler interfaces with 
generic design characteristics. 

As computer graphics and multimedia technologies advanced, 
the use of animation (e.g., moving images/text, flashing 
objects, pop-up ads on Web sites, animated products such as 
viewing a piece of clothing from multiple angles, or animated 
services such as viewing a slide show of hotel amenities) has 
become increasingly popular on the Web (Zhang 2000). 

In addition to being entertaining (Thomas and Calder 2001) 
and increasing comprehension through information visualization 
(Mackinlay et al. 1994), animation attracts users¡¯ 
attention to the animated content on thescreen (Diao and 
Sundar 2004; Fasolo et al. 2006; Hong et al. 2005, 2007; 
Nielsen 2000). Little IS research has examined the effect of 
moving image designs on Web sites perceptions (Hong et al. 
2005, 2007). Such research is even scarcer when it comes to 
investigating the effect of moving images on time perceptions 
during online waits. Researchers were prompted to conduct 
studies on the use of moving objects on Web sites and investigate 
their effects on PWT (Gorn et al. 2004). Webelieve this 
is a particularly important area of research because attention 
is a very scarce resource on the Internet (Davenport and Beck 
2001), and the average waiting time online is onlytwo 
seconds before users switch their attention elsewhere (Nah 
2004). 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 375 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

We use motion effect theory in order to investigate the effect 
of image motion in filler interface design during online waits. 
We manipulate image motion by alternating various images 
during a timeinterval, similar to an automated slideshow. 
This type of motion is referred to astertiary motion (Zettl 
1973), which is a sense of motion induced by a series of shots. 
In thistypeof motion, a series of images are presented in a 
quick, sequentialsuccession and the result is an illusion of 
motion or animation (ChanLin 2000; Detenber and Reeves 
1996; Heo 2006). Such sequential image slideshows may be 
considered one form of animation, which is generally defined 
as a series of rapidly changing computer screen displays that 
represent the illusion of motion (ChanLin 2000). 

Motion effect theory generally postulates that human attention 
is very sensitive to stimuli that embed motion. Moving 
images as stimuli encompass motion (Reeves and Nass 1996) 
and are visually distinct from other stimuli (e.g.,static 
images) (Hong et al. 2007). Such moving images create a 
sudden change in human peripheral vision (Girelli and Luck 
1997) by disturbing the status quo (Goldstein 1989) and a 
sudden attention shift or ¡°orienting response¡± (Lang 1990) 
occurs. The orienting response is a short-term attention 
reaction (Lang 2000) evoked by certain stimuli that are either 
moving, novel, meaningful, or surprising (Diao and Sundar 
2004). Research in various domains (including IS) shows that 
various types of animation (e.g., banner ads, flash) attract 
users¡¯ involuntary attention and direct individuals¡¯ concentration 
toward the moving object even if users are engaged in 
preassigned tasks (Diao and Sundar 2004; Fasolo et al. 2006; 
Hong et al. 2005, 2007). In addition, moving images reduce 
attentional resources available for the main information processing 
task, thus negatively impacting recall as users need to 
allocate more mental resources to suppress the distraction 
(Hong et al. 2005). 

Based on motion effect theory, we expect that filler interfaces 
with moving images would induce a feelingoffocused 
immersion during online waits. Thisconjecture is perfectly 
in line with past research using motion effecttheory, which 
postulates that moving images attract users¡¯ attention more 
than static images. Various studies in marketing and advertising 
(Diao and Sundar 2004; Fasolo et al. 2006; Phillips and 
Lee 2005), media and communication (Detenber et al. 1998; 
Ravaja 2004; Simons et al. 2000; Simons et al. 1999) and IS 
(Hong et al. 2005, 2007; Lai et al. 2009) showed that as 
compared to staticimages, moving images captured more 
attentional resources. Moving images also appeared to sustain 
attention for longer periods of time than static ones 
(Simons et al. 2000). Thus, we state H7a as follows: 

H7a: Filler interfaces with moving images lead to higher 

focused immersion than filler interfaces with static 

images. 

Furthermore, we propose that movingimages on a filler 
interface can induce an orientingresponse in the form of 
temporal dissociation during online waits. This claim is based 
on the following logic: (1) the orienting response caused by 
moving images is a short-term reaction which fits the filler 
interface environment and online waits, and (2) moving 
images create a sudden attention shift on the source of motion, 
thus attention is distracted away from the passage of time 
itself. We thus propose the following: 

H7b: Filler interfaces with moving images lead to higher 

temporal dissociation than filler interfaces with 

static images. 

Finally, moving images on a filler interface can also induce a 
state of heightened enjoyment during online waits. Previous 
studies using motion effect theory showed that formal 
properties of stimuli (e.g., moving images) create emotional 
responses such as arousal, entertainment, or excitement (Lai 
et al. 2009; Philips and Lee 2005; Reeves et al. 1999; Simons 
et al. 2000). In fact, Simons et al. (2000) found that moving 
imageswere more physiologically arousing than static ones 
regardless of whether image valence was positive, neutral, or 
negative. They authors concluded that the impact of image 
motion on image-induced emotional responses was ¡°inherent 
to the motion itself¡± (p. 708). We thus propose the following: 

H7c: Filler interfaces with moving images lead to more 

heightened enjoyment than filler interfaces with 

static images. 

Structural Equation Model: Research 
Hypotheses¡ªAntecedents andConsequences of PWT 

In this section, we adopt cognitive absorption theory and the 
literature ofusers¡¯ attitude formation and technology acceptance 
to develop a nomological network among antecedents 
of PWT, PWT, and its consequences. We first focus on three 
dimensions of cognitive absorption (temporal dissociation, 
focused immersion, and heightened enjoyment) as antecedents 
of PWT. Then, basedonthe literature of users¡¯ attitude 
formation and technology acceptance, we select affective and 
cognitive appraisals about the Web site and their use intention 
as consequences of PWT. 

As we notedpreviously, during waits, if individuals can 
engage in distracting tasks that require their attention, they 
will perceive a shorter waiting duration (Baker and Cameron 
1996). This is because people become so absorbed with an 
activity thatall irrelevant perceptions and thoughts simply 

376 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


fade away (Csikszentmihalyi 1990). Such focused immersion 
can be a result of greater focus on nontemporal cues provided 
on a filler interface (e.g., text or images) (Zakay and Block 
2004). Aligned with resource allocation theory, if a concurrent, 
nontemporal task is more demanding, a person has fewer 
cognitive resources available to allocate for temporal information 
processing. Thus, we argue that to the extent a filler 
interface contains elements that draw users¡¯ attention, they 
will becomelargely immersed in the interaction with the filler 
interface and in turn their PWT will be reduced. H8a reflects 
this logic: 

H8a: 
Greater focused immersion due to a filler interface 

will negatively relate to PWT in an online environ


ment. 

Further, temporal dissociation is an important antecedent of 
PWT which affects an individual¡¯s ability to note passage of 
time during an interaction with the software (Agarwal and 
Karahanna 2000). If people achieve a state of temporal dissociation 
during an online experience (based on various interface 
designs), they tend to lose their sense of physical time 
(Csikszentmihalyi 1990), hence they will perceive a shorter 
time duration (i.e., shorter PWT) (Skadberg and Kimmel 
2004). This negative relationship between temporal dissociation 
and PWT is widely recognized in past wait studies in 
physical environments (Kellaris and Mantel 1994). Along the 
same vein, we expect that in online wait contexts, various 
design elements of a filler interface can induce temporal 
dissociation for peopleengaged in an online activity, which 
in turn will reduce their PWT. Thus, 

H8b: 
Greater temporal dissociation due to a filler inter


face will negatively relate to PWT in an online 

environment. 

Inaddition, to the extent that people experience heightened 
enjoyment because of the design cues embedded in a filler 
interface, PWT can decline. Past research supports this argument. 
For example, Hornik (1981) revealed that happy events 
seemed shorter than somber ones. Fraisse (1984) found that 
interesting prose passages provided better enjoyment and 
were judged shorter than boring ones. North and Hargreaves 
(1996) also pointed out that people perceived less waiting 
timewhen they observed stimuli they liked, such as music. 
Therefore, we propose the following: 

H8c: 
Heightened enjoyment due to a filler interface will 
negatively relate to PWT in an online environment. 

A Web site will likely induce negativeattitudes when it is 
preceded by a lengthy delay (Dellaert and Kahn 1999; Hui 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

andTse1996; Rose et al. 2005; Weinberg 2000). Based on 
recent research in social psychology, attitude consists of two 
distinct dimensions namely affective appraisals and cognitive 
appraisals (Kempf 1999; Trafimow and Sheeran 1998; Trafimow 
et al.2004; Wolfinbarger and Gilly 2003). Affective 
appraisals are evaluations based on feelings, emotions, and 
gut reactions that individuals experience in relation to an 
attractive object (Breckler 1984; Eagly and Chaiken 1993), 
while cognitive appraisals refer to the utilitarian aspect of the 
attitude (Van der Heijden 2002). As hedonic features of 
information technologies become more and more prevalent, 
recent IS research has devoted more attention to the dual 
nature of attitude and suggested that affective and cognitive 
appraisals should be captured distinctively in research models 
(Te¡¯eni 2001, p. 253). In the context of online waits, affective 
appraisals measure hedonic experiences with Web interfaces 
(e.g., happy, good, relaxed, likable,or satisfactory). Since 
long waiting times provoke dissatisfaction, anxiety, dislike, 
and unpleasantness (Baker and Cameron 1996; Guynes 1988; 
Rose et al. 2005; Taylor 1994), we can predict a negative 
relationship between PWT and affective appraisals (Rose et 
al. 2005; Rushinek and Rushinek 1986). Therefore, 

H9a: 
Users¡¯ PWT will negatively influence their affective 
appraisals of a Web site. 

In contrast, cognitive appraisals constitute the utilitarian 
aspect of the attitude whichrelates to its value to an 
individual (Batra and Ahtola 1990; Van der Heijden 2002). 
They are evaluations based on instrumental beliefs such as 
usefulness and ease of use (Van der Heijden 2004) as opposed 
to hedonic considerations (such as feelings, moods, or emotions) 
(Eagly andChaiken 1993). In waiting contexts, 
individuals will evaluate service providers more negatively if 
PWT is longer than expected (Hui and Tse 1996). Previous 
studies found a negative relationship between lengthy waiting 
times and utilitarian evaluations such as performance, convenience, 
efficiency, and effectiveness (Katz et al. 1991; 
Pruyn and Smidts 1998; Taylor 1994; Thompson et al. 1996; 
Tomet al. 1997; Tom and Lucey 1997). Based on these considerations, 
we propose that PWT will have a negative impact 
on cognitive appraisals of a Web site. This logic is reflected 
in H9b. 

H9b: 
Users¡¯ PWT will negatively influence their cognitive 
appraisals of a Web site. 

Heightened enjoyment refers to the pleasurable aspect of the 
interaction with the software (Agarwal and Karahanna 2000). 
Previous studies found that hedoniccomponents in physical 
store design (e.g., color, light, music, store layout) influenced 
customers¡¯ overall pleasant shoppingexperience as well as 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 377 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

their positive evaluations of the store (e.g., Yoo et al. 1998). 
In an online context, incorporating hedonic components on 
filler interfaces as part of e-business Web sites can increase 
the enjoyment of the visit and positively affect theoverall 
perceptions toward the site. Studies on technology acceptance 
also support the influenceof enjoyment on cognitive 
appraisals (i.e., usefulness) (Venkatesh et al. 2002). Therefore, 
we suggest that if a filler interface is perceived to be 
enjoyable, users will rate their overall Web experience as both 
enjoyable and useful. Thus, we propose H10: 

H10a: 
Users¡¯ heightened enjoyment relative to a filler 

interface will positively influence their affective 

appraisals of a Web site. 

H10b: 
Users¡¯ heightened enjoyment relative toafiller 

interface will positively influence their cognitive 

appraisals of a Web site. 

Further,based on the affect primacy hypothesis (LeDoux 
1995; Van der Heijen 2002; Zajonc 1980), affective appraisals 
arise earlier in the human brain than cognitive 
appraisals. In other words, specific affective emotions and 
general mood may impact an individual¡¯s instrumental beliefs 
regarding an attitude object (e.g., Web site). Because 
heightened enjoyment (intrinsic motivation) was found to be 
an antecedent of usefulness (extrinsic motivation) in previous 
technology acceptance literature (e.g., Venkatesh and Bala 
2008; Venkatesh et al. 2002), we expect the samerelationship 
in the context of our study. Hence we propose that affective 
appraisals of a Web site will positively influence the cognitive 
appraisals of the site. 

H11: 
Users¡¯ affective appraisals will positively influence 
their cognitive appraisals of the Web site. 

Finally, we posit that affective and cognitive appraisals have 
positive impacts on Web site use intention. Previous research 
proposed a direct relationship between affective and cognitive 
appraisals and intention to use (Galletta et al. 2006; Hoxmeier 
and DiCesare 2000; Van der Heijden 2004). This relationship 
is also supported by the theory of reasoned action(Fishbein 
and Ajzen 1975) and the technology acceptance model (Davis 
1989). To the extent that individuals formpositive appraisals 
of a Web site (both affective and cognitive), they will likely 
intend to use it. Our last two hypotheses reflect this thinking. 

H12a: 
Users¡¯ affective appraisalsof a Web site will positively 
influence their intention to use the Web site. 

H12b: 
Users¡¯ cognitive appraisals of a Web site will positively 
influence their intention to use the Web site. 

Research Method 

Two controlled experiments were conducted to examine the 
effect of (1) the presence of textand images (Study 2) and 

(2) the interplay among relevance of text, relevance of 
images, and image motion (Study 3) on individuals¡¯ cognitive 
absorption dimensions, which in turn affects PWT. We 
further examined the nomological networks between PWT 
and overall user evaluations ofWeb sites using AMOS 17.0, 
a structural equation modeling technique. A total of 355 
subjects were recruited for Study 2 and Study 3 (n2 = 127 and 
n3 = 228 respectively). All participants were business school 
students at a large midwestern U.S. university who had at 
least a one-time online purchase experience through an online 
travel site. For all studies, participation was voluntary. Subjects 
could earn class participation points and an opportunity 
to win a sweepstake (small cash prize) in return for their 
participation. 
For Studies 2 and 3, we used the same simulated online travel 
Web site used for Study 1, but developed diverse filler interfaces 
by manipulating the presence and relevance of image 
and text, and of image motion. 

Study 2: Procedure and Design 

From a design perspective, Study 1 does not provide any 
specific information with respect to which filler interface 
design components are more influential in attracting users¡¯ 
attention and distorting time perceptions during online waits. 
Therefore, Study 2 focuses on the two most populardesign 
components in commercial filler interfaces, namely text and 
image. We designed four different filler interface conditions 
(no-filler interface, text only, image only, image and text) and 
examined how these conditions affected users¡¯ perceptions of 
focused immersion and temporal dissociation duringonline 
waits. 

Study 2 was conductedonemonth after Study 1. Subjects 
wererandomly assigned to one of the conditions of a two 
(image presence condition: no image versus image) by two 
(text presence condition: no text versus text) between-
subjects design. The no-filler interface condition wasthe 
same as that of Study 1. The image only fillerinterface 
condition included a Las Vegas main strip image, and the text 
only condition included recent Las Vegas show information. 
For the image and text condition, we included the sameimage 
and text usedfor the image only and text only conditions. 
The experiment was conducted in the same lab setting 
following the same procedures as Study 1. 

378 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


Study 2: Manipulation Check and Results 

The independent variables in Study 2 were the presence of 
image and the presence of text. The dependent variables were 
the same as those of Study 1 (focused immersion and 
temporal dissociation). We first conducted manipulation 
checks for the presence of image/text. In order to examine 
whether subjects correctly recognizedthe presence of 
image/text shown in a filler interface, we asked each subject 
three questions (i.e., ¡°What did you see while waiting for the 
requested results? [Image, Text, Nothing]¡±). We found that 
an average of 95 percent of the subjects exactly matched the 
imageand text information for four different presence 
conditions, implying that the manipulation was successful. 

Our results suggest full support for H2 and partial support for 
H3. A MANOVA test was conducted in order to test the 
effect of the presence of image and the presence of text. We 
found that the Wilks¡¯ lambda of the presence of image 
(Wilks¡¯ ¦Ë= 9.233, p < .001) and the presence of text (Wilks¡¯ 
¦Ë = 7.986, p < .001) were significant, although the interaction 
between presence of image and presence of text was not 
significant (Wilks¡¯ ¦Ë = 1.962, p > .05) (seeTable 3). The 
subsequent ANOVA test (see Table 3) showed that presence 
of image and presence of text had significant effects on both 
temporal dissociation and focused immersion, while the 
interaction effect was not significant. 

We further conducted mean comparisons for the four conditions. 
As shown in Table 4, for focused immersionwe 
found significant differences between the no-filler interface 
and text only, image only,and image and text conditions 
respectively. This finding implies that a filler interface with 
either single design elements (image or text) or combinations 
of visual elements (text and image) is equally effective in 
attracting users¡¯ attention during online waits. Interestingly, 
the image and text condition wasnotsignificantly more 
effective than the image only or the text only condition.
Although image was slightly more effective than text for 
focused immersion (MeanImage Only = 3.77, MeanText Only = 3.55), 
the difference was also not significant (mean differences = 
0.219, p > .05). 

For temporal dissociation, we only found significant differences 
between the no-filler interface condition and image 
and text condition, and between image only conditionand 
image and text condition. The first finding impliesthat 
combinations of visual elements (both text and image) are 
effective in causing temporal dissociation during online waits. 
Including only single visual cues (only image or only text) on 
a filler interface might not significantly induce more temporal 
dissociation than using no-filler interface. The second finding 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

where text (along with image) was more effective for 
temporal dissociation than image only is a rather interesting 
finding. One possible interpretation is that as compared to an 
image that people can immediately comprehend, it takes more 
time and effort for people to read both the text and grasp the 
image¡¯s message, thus more temporal dissociation. Otherwise 
stated, people allocate more attentional resources to reading 
the text and viewing the image on a filler interface, which 
may result in higher temporal dissociation than seeing an 
image alone. 

Study 3: Procedure and Design 

Study 2 provides evidence that individuals¡¯ temporal dissociation 
and focused immersion perceptions are significantly 
affected by the presence of imageand text within a filler 
interface. However, one question still remains: what possible 
properties or characteristics of image or text (instead of their 
mere presence) affect users¡¯ cognitive absorption perceptions? 

We designed Study3totackle this question. We focus on 
three filler interface design characteristics including relevance 
of image, relevance of text, and image motion to examine 
their effects on users¡¯ cognitive absorption perceptions of 
temporal dissociation, focused immersion, and heightened 
enjoyment. Although customized interface design has been 
widely recommended in HCI research(e.g., Mathwick et al. 
2010), few commercial online travel sites use customized 
filler interfaces that contain the relevant design components 
thatmeet with users¡¯ search objectives. In addition, despite 
theadvancement and popularity of Web technologies that 
allow Web designers to show images in a moreanimated 
fashion (e.g., Flash),there is a lack of studies that test the 
impacts of thesetechnologies in Web site design, and, in 
particular, filler interface design. 

We randomly assigned subjects to one of the conditions of a 
two (image relevance condition: relevant image versus 
generic image) by two(text relevance condition: relevant 
text versus generic text) by two (image motion condition: 
moving versus static) between-subjects design (see Table 5). 
Eight different filler interfaces were created for testing our 
hypotheses (H4¨CH7). Pretests were conducted to select 
images and texts used for manipulating the relevance of text 
and the relevance of image and image motion. We also 
conducted an exploratory factor analysis to assess the psychometric 
properties of the dependent variables including focused 
immersion, temporal dissociation, and heightened enjoyment 
(see Appendix C for the details of the pretests). Through pretests, 
we identified five highly relevant images, five generic 
images, two highly relevant texts, and two generic texts for 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 379 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Table 3. Study 2: Tests of Between-Subjects Effect 
Source Dependent Variable Sum of Squares df 
Mean 
Square F Sig. 
Intercept Focused Immersion 1568.231 1 1568.231 915.222 .000 
Temporal Dissociation 1613.024 1 1613.024 976.386 .000 
Presence of Image Focused Immersion 26.962 1 26.962 15.735 .000 
Temporal Dissociation 8.867 1 8.867 5.368 .022 
Presence of Text Focused Immersion 15.657 1 15.657 9.138 .003 
Temporal Dissociation 15.803 1 15.803 9.566 .002 
Presence of Image * 
Presence of Text 
Focused Immersion 2.727 1 2.727 1.591 .210 
Temporal Dissociation 2.852 1 2.852 1.726 .191 
Error Focused Immersion 210.760 123 1.713 
Temporal Dissociation 203.200 123 1.652 
Total Focused Immersion 1848.188 127 
Temporal Dissociation 1867.480 127 

Table 4. Study 2: Mean Comparison Between No Filler, Text Only, Image Only, and Image and Text 
Condition 
a) Focused Immersion 
Manipulation No filler Text Only Image Only Image and Text 
Mean 2.56 3.55 3.77 4.18 
n 30 32 31 34 
No filler -0.996 (0.034) -1.216 (0.006) -1.625 (0.000) 
Text Only 0.996 (0.034) -0.219 (0.931) -0.629 (0.288) 
Image Only 1.216 (0.006) 0.219 (0.931) -0.409 (0.663) 
Image and Text 1.625 (0.000) 0.629 (0.288) 0.409 (0.663) 
b) Temporal Dissociation 
Manipulation No filler Text Only Image Only Image and Text 
Mean 3.10 3.51 3.33 4.34 
n 30 32 31 34 
No filler -0.406 (0.672) -0.229 (0.922) -1.235 (0.003) 
Text Only 0.406 (0.672) 0.177 (0.960) -0.829 (0.082) 
Image Only 0.229 (0.922) -0.177 (0.960) -1.006 (0.002) 
Image and Text 1.235 (0.003) 0.829 (0.922) 1.006 (0.002) 

Table 5. Study 3: Research Design 
Relevance of Image 
Relevant Generic 
Static Move Static Move 
Relevance of 
Text 
Relevant n = 26 n = 27 n = 27 n = 29 
Generic n = 30 n = 27 n = 29 n = 33 

380 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

designing filler interfaces. In addition,we found that all 
dependent variables had strong psychometric properties. All 
factor loading scores were greater than .728 and Cronbach¡¯s 
alpha values were all greater than .929. 

Study 3: Manipulation Check and Results 

Before conducting the data analysis, we performedmanipulation 
checks to examine whether the relevance of image and 
the relevance of text and image motion weresuccessfully 
manipulated. In order to establish the relevance of text/image, 
participants responded to five relevance questions (e.g., ¡°The 
image/text shown in the filler interface was informative/ 
useful/helpful.¡±) on a five point Likert-type scale. An 
ANOVA test was used to verify the successof the manipulation. 
The mean difference for generic and relevant images 
and text was significant (Meangen = 3.90, Meanrel= 4.41, F1, 226 
= 7.491, p < .01 for image; Meangen = 3.95, Meanrel = 4.36, 
F1, 226 = 4.8781,p < .05 for text) implying the successful 
manipulation of relevance.4 We also checked whether the 
image motion was successfully manipulated. We compared 
the mean difference betweenimage motion (Mean = 4.737, 
SD = 1.28) and static image (Mean = 3.92, SD = 1.481) using 
two perceived image motion items (see Appendix B). The 
ANOVA test results demonstrated significant statistical 
differences between thetwo image motion conditions (F = 
19.647, p < .001) in support of the successful manipulation of 
image motion. An exploratory factor analysis showed that all 
dependent variables (temporal dissociation, focused immersion, 
and heightened enjoyment) had high reliabilities (at least 
.929) and high factor loading scores (at least .728). 

A MANOVA test was conducted in order to test the relevance 
and motion effects. We found that the Wilks¡¯ lambda of 
image relevance (F1, 216 = 4.300, p < .01), text relevance (F1, 216 
= 6.839, p < .001), and image motion (F1, 216 = 10.319, p < 
.001) were significant, but their interaction effects were not 
(perceived relevance of image ¡Á perceived relevance of text, 
F = 0.819, p > .05; perceived relevance of image ¡Á image 
motion, F = 0.300, p > .05; perceived relevance of text ¡Á 
image motion, F = 0.837, p > .05; perceived relevance of 
image ¡Á perceived relevance of text ¡Á image motion, F = 
0.218, p > .05). 

The subsequent ANOVA tests (see Table 6) showed that 
image relevance, text relevance, and image motion had 
significant effects on temporal dissociation, focused 
immersion, and heightened enjoyment while the interaction 
effects were insignificant for alldependent variables. Thus, 
we found support for H4¨CH7. 

4A five-point Likert scale was used for measuring perceived relevance. 

Mediation Tests 

Finally, following the four-step procedure proposed by Baron 
and Kenny (1986), we conducted mediation tests for Study 2 
and Study 3 to examine whether three dimensions of cognitive 
absorption (temporal dissociation, focused immersion, and 
heightened enjoyment) fully mediated the relationships 
between filler interface designs and PWT5(see Table 7). We 
found that for Study 2, both focused immersion and temporal 
dissociation fully mediated the relationship. Meanwhile, 
focused immersion and heightened enjoyment fully mediated 
the relationship, while temporal dissociation partially 
mediated this relationship in Study 3. To examine the partial 
mediation of temporal dissociation, we redid the regression 
analyses. First, we ran a regression by including only 
temporal dissociation and PWT and found that their 
relationships were significant. Then, we ran the regression 
again by including focused immersion, temporal dissociation, 
and heightened enjoyment and found that temporal dissociation 
was not significant. One possible reason for the partial 
mediation of temporal dissociation may be that the effects of 
focused immersion and heightened enjoyment on PWT were 
dominant over temporal dissociation.6 

Structural Equation Model (SEM) Analysis 

The main objective of the structural equation model analysis 
was to examine the antecedents of PWT, PWT itself, and 
users¡¯ overall perceptions of the Web site and use intention. 

 Wepooled the data gathered through the surveysused in 
Study 2 and Study 3, and analyzed them using AMOS 17.0. 
Before using the pooled data of 355 user responses (Study 2: 
n = 127; Study 3: n = 228), we compared all demographic 
information of the two datasets and found no significant differences 
with regard to gender (Meanstudy2 = 1.54, Meanstudy3 = 
1.53, F = 0.011, p > .05), age (Meanstudy2 = 20.13, Meanstudy3 
= 20.21,F = 0.115, p > .05), online travel site experience 
(Meanstudy2 = 3.98, Meanstudy3 = 4.03, F = 0.259, p > .05), and 
Internet use experience (Meanstudy2 = 3.85, Meanstudy3 = 3.91, 
F = 1.617, p > .05). 

5Although Study 2 and Study 3 did not hypothesize and test the relationship 
between filler interface designs and PWT, we assessed PWT using the three 
scales developed by Gorn et al.(2004) for the subsequent nomological 
networks analysis. Thus, we cantest the mediation effect of cognitive 
absorption. However, we only examined the mediating effects of each 
independent variable without examining the combined effects. 

6In this study, we conducted the mediating test for each independent variable 
without considering the combined interaction effects which is a limitation of 
this study. 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 381 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Table 6. Study 3: Tests of Between-Subjects Effects 
Source DV SS df MS F Sig 
Perceived relevance of text 
TD 16.561 (1, 220) 16.561 11.242 .001 
FI 25.101 (1, 220) 25.101 13.329 .000 
HE 18.320 (1, 220) 18.320 11.504 .001 
Perceived relevance of image 
TD 14.592 (1, 220) 14.592 9.905 .002 
FI 9.888 (1, 220) 9.888 5.251 .023 
HE 12.622 (1, 220) 12.622 7.926 .005 
Image motion 
TD 30.535 (1, 220) 30.535 20.727 .000 
FI 38.137 (1, 220) 38.137 20.251 .000 
HE 29.025 (1, 220) 29.025 18.226 .000 
Perceived relevance of text ¡Á Perceived relevance of 
image 
TD 1.457 (1, 220) 1.457 0.989 .321 
FI .331 (1, 220) 0.331 0.176 .675 
HE .001 (1, 220) 0.001 0.001 .982 
Perceived relevance of text ¡Á Image motion 
TD .144 (1, 220) 0.144 0.098 .755 
FI .494 (1, 220) 0.494 0.262 .609 
HE .064 (1, 220) 0.064 0.040 .841 
Perceived relevance of image ¡Á Image motion 
TD .054 (1, 220) 0.054 0.037 .848 
FI 3.655 (1, 220) 3.655 1.941 .165 
HE 1.604 (1, 220) 1.604 1.007 .317 
Perceived relevance of text ¡Á Perceived relevance of 
image ¡Á Image motion 
TD .008 (1, 220) 0.008 0.005 .942 
FI .928 (1, 220) 0.928 0.493 .483 
HE .470 (1, 220) 0.470 0.295 .587 

Table 7. Study 3: Results of Mediation Tests 
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 
Study 2 . Image Presence . PWT 
t = 2.489, p < 0.05 
. Text Presence . PWT 
t = 3.651, p < 0.001 
. Image Presence . FI 
t = 3.911, p < 0.001 
. Text Presence . FI 
t = 2.987, p < 0.01 
. Image Presence . TD 
t = 2.363, p < 0.05 
. Text Presence . TD 
t = 3.115, p < 0.01 
.FI. PWT 
t = 4.096, p < 0.001 
.TD. PWT 
t = 8.839, p < 0.001 
. Image Presence . PWT 
t = 0.234, p > 0.05 
. Text Presence . PWT 
t = 1.413, p > 0.05 
.FI. PWT 
t = 3.505, p < 0.01 
.TD. PWT 
t = 8.199, p < 0.001 
Study 3 . Image Relevance . PWT 
t = 3.379, p < 0.001 
. Text Relevance . PWT 
t = 3.827, p < 0.001 
. Image Motion . PWT 
t = 4.406, p < 0.001 
. Image Relevance . FI 
t = 2.324, p < 0.05 
. Text Relevance . FI 
t = 3.672, p < 0.001 
. Image Motion . FI 
t = 4.467, p < 0.001 
. Image Relevance . TD 
t = 3.135, p < 0.01 
. Text Relevance . TD 
t = 3.344, p < 0.001 
. Image Motion . TD 
t = 4.609, p < 0.001 
. Image Relevance . HE 
t = 2.820, p < 0.01 
. Text Relevance . HE 
t = 3.368, p < 0.01 
. Image Motion . HE 
t = 4.351, p < 0.00 
.FI. PWT 
t = 4.903, p < 0.001 
.TD. PWT 
t = 1.599, p > 0.05 
.HE. PWT 
t = 7.384, p < 0.001 
. Image Relevance . PWT 
t = 1.468, p > 0.05 
. Text Relevance . PWT 
t = 1.551, p > 0.05 
. Image Motion . PWT 
t = 1.227, p > 0.05 
.FI. PWT 
t = 4.512, p < 0.001 
.TD. PWT 
t = .889, p > 0.05 
.HE. PWT 
t = 6.864, p < 0.001 

382 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


In addition to items used for temporal dissociation, focused 
immersion, and heightened enjoyment, participants of Studies 
2 and 3 also answered questions measuring PWT,cognitive 
and affective appraisals, and Web site use intention (see 
Appendix B). The PWT measure used three items fromGorn 
et al. (2004). Affective appraisals employed five itemsfrom 
Fishbeinand Ajzen (1975). The four cognitive appraisals 
items were based on Lee and Kozar (2009). Finally, the three 
use intention items were adopted from Palmer (2002). 

Measurement Model Analysis 

We conducted a confirmatoryfactor analysis (CFA) to 

(1) validate the psychometric properties of the instrument, 
(2) examine whether the measurement model achieved an 
acceptable goodness-of-fit, and (3) investigate its unidimensionality, 
convergent and discriminant validity, and reliability. 
The overall goodness-of-fit for the model reached the cut-off 
value (Hair et al. 2006). The ¦Ö2/df was 2.212 and below the 
desired threshold of 3.0. The root mean squared error of 
approximation(RMSEA) was .059, below the .08 cut-off 
level. In addition, both the normed fit index (NFI = .941) and 
confirmatory fit index (CFI = .967) were greater than the 
required value of .90. Finally, goodness-of-fit index (GFI = 
.870) and adjusted GFI (.840) were greater than the threshold 
value of .80. Thus, we can conclude that the measurement 
model fitted the data well. 
Fornell and Larcker (1981) suggested three criteria for convergent 
validity: (1) all indicator factor loadings (¦Ë) should 
be significant at p < .05 and exceed .7, (2) composite reliabilities 
should exceed .7, and (3) the average variance 
extracted (AVE) for each construct should exceed the 
variance due to the measurement error for that construct. As 
shown in Table 8, all factor loadings in the CFA model 
exceeded .7 and were significant at p = .001. The composite 
reliabilities ranged between .881 and .967, while the AVE 
values were well above the cut-off value of .50 and greater 
than the variance due to measurement error. Therefore, it is 
evident that the model meets all three conditions for convergent 
validity. 

To assess discriminant validity, we constrained the estimated 
correlation parameters (¦Õij) betweenconstructs to 1.0 and 
performed chi-square difference tests on the values obtained 
for the constrained and unconstrained models. As a result, we 
found significant chi-square differences at p < .05, in support 
of discriminant validity of these constructs. As shown in 
Table 9, all constructs had a stronger correlation with their 
own measures than withthose of other constructs. All 
correlations between constructs were less than .7 and less than 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

thesquare root value of the AVE, also in support of discriminant 
validity. Finally, as shown in Table 8, the Cronbach¡¯s 
alphas of all constructs, which were all greater than or 
equal to .879, indicated the high reliability of the itemsused 
for each construct. 

Structural Model Analysis 

Figure 2 depicts the structural model analysis results, 
including path loadings for all hypothesized relationships. 
The model successfully explained a large amount of variance 
in PWT (R2 = 0.508) and overall Web site evaluations (R2 = 

0.505 for Affective Appraisals; R2 = 0.441 for Cognitive 
Appraisals and R2 = 0.445 for Use Intention). Focused 
immersion (H8a: ¦Ë = -0.397, p < .001), temporal dissociation 
(H8b: ¦Ë = -0.110, p < .01), and heightened enjoyment (H8c: 
¦Ë = -0.347, p < .001) all strongly influenced PWT and 
explaineda large proportion of its variance (R2 = .508). In 
addition, PWT exhibited a strong influence on affective 
appraisals (H9a: ¦Ë=-0.375, p < .001) and cognitive 
appraisals (H9b: ¦Ë = -0.450, p < .001) of the online travel 
site. Heightened enjoyment experiencedthrough a filler 
interface had a significant effect on affective appraisals 
(H10a: ¦Ë = 0.413, p < .001) but not on cognitive appraisals 
(H9a: ¦Ë = -0.046, p > .05). In turn, affective appraisals 
revealed significant effects on cognitive appraisals (H9: ¦Ë = 
.324, p < .001). Finally, both affective and cognitive 
appraisals significantly influenced Web site use intentions 
(H12a: ¦Ë = .389, p < .001; H12b: ¦Ë = .363, p < .001). 
Since this study was cross-sectional in nature, we examined 
the presence of the common method bias (CMB) using a 
technique recommended by Podsakoff et al. (2003), controlling 
for the effects of an unmeasured latent methods 
factor. Our testresults revealed that the significance of all 
relationships in the nomological network was unchanged. In 
addition, the overall goodness-of-fit measures for the models 
were not significantly different, indicating that biases were 
not substantial.7 

Discussion 

Using the theories of resource allocation, cognitive absorption, 
and competition for attention, visual search, and motion 
effect, this study investigated the influence of filler interface 
designs on online wait. Three controlled experiments and 

7Because the model was under-identified, we conducted paired control for the 
latent variables to examine the common method bias. 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 383 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Table 8. Results of Measurement Model Analysis 
Construct 
Item 
Loadings 
Cronbach¡¯sAlpha 
CompositeReliability 
Average Variance 
Extracted 
Focused Immersion 
0.867 
0.953 0.952 0.8320.881 
0.967 
0.930 
Time Distortion 
0.847 
0.937 0.938 0.753 
0.924 
0.858 
0.846 
0.860 
Heightened Enjoyment 
0.908 
0.952 0.948 0.8220.970 
0.913 
0.829 
Perceived Waiting Time 
0.947 
0.966 0.967 0.9070.979 
0.930 
Cognitive Appraisals 
0.948 
0.963 0.964 0.8700.971 
0.869 
0.940 
Affective Appraisals 
0.923 
0.963 0.963 0.840 
0.955 
0.864 
0.948 
0.888 
Use Intention 
0.891 
0.879 0.881 0.7120.789 
0.849 

Table 9. Inter-Construct Correlation MatrixMean SD FI TD HE PWT AA CA UI 
Focused immersion 3.920 1.344 0.912Temporal dissociation 3.727 1.460 0.295 0.867 
Heightened enjoyment 4.022 1.414 0.242 0.652 0.906 
Perceived Waiting Time 2.680 1.645 -0.323 -0.689 -0.651 0.952 
Affective Appraisals 4.992 1.255 0.174 0.575 0.658 -0.644 0.933 
Cognitive Appraisals 4.486 1.425 0.191 0.549 0.450 -0.619 0.583 0.916 
Use Intention 3.988 1.156 0.244 0.547 0.525 -0.576 0.597 0.590 0.844 

*Values in diagonal represent the square root of the average variance extracted. 

384 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Temporal 
Dissociation 
Focused 
Immersion 
H9a: -0.375*** 
H10a: 0.413*** 
H9b: -0.450*** 
H8a: -0.397*** 
H8b: -0.110** 
H8c: -0.347*** 
Perceived 
Waiting Time 
(R2 
=0.508) 
Heightened 
Enjoyment 
H10b: -0.046 
Affective 
Appraisals 
(R2 =0.505) 
Cognitive 
Appraisals 
(R2 =0.441) 
H11: 0.324*** 
Use 
Intention 
(R2 =0.445) 
H12b: 0.363*** 
H12a: 0.389*** 
Figure 2. Results of the Nomological Network Analysis 

structural equation modeling analysis were conducted to 
confirm the relationships between filler interface designs and 
waiting time perceptions.Specifically, we showed how 
manipulations of various filler interface designs influenced 
cognitive absorption variables, namely focused immersion, 
temporal dissociation, and heightened enjoyment. In addition, 
we investigated how these cognitive perceptions affected 
PWT online, which in turn triggered individuals¡¯ affective 
and cognitive appraisals of the overall Web site anduse 
intention. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study 
in an online waiting context that explores the influence of 
diverse filler interface designs on PWT. This study is also the 
first attempt to propose a theoretical modelthat links filler 
interface design, cognitive absorption perceptions, PWT, and 
Web site evaluations. Our proposed model exhibited good 
psychometric properties and explained significant amounts of 
variance of all endogenous variables (approximately 51 percent, 
51 percent, 44 percent, and 45 percent for PWT, affective 
and cognitive appraisals, and use intention, respectively). 

Results from exploratoryStudy 1 confirmed our initial 
intuition that users experience more focused immersion and 
temporal dissociation whenthey see a filler interface while 
waiting online. This finding firmly established the filler 
interface as an important tool to manipulate online users¡¯ 
cognitive time perceptions and provided a stronger empirical 
basis for deeper investigations into the various design 
characteristics of filler interfaces. 

The two follow-up studies (Study 2 and Study 3) corroborated 
Study 1¡¯s results and also provided additional evidence for 
various designs of filler interface and their role in manipulating 
individuals¡¯ time perceptions during online waits. 
Results fromStudy 2 suggested that online users experience 
more focused immersion when viewing a filler interface (with 
either text or image, and a combination of text and image) 
than not seeing a filler interface whilewaiting online. The 
interaction effect between text and image was insignificant (as 
compared to the text/image only conditions), suggesting that 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 385 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

a filler interface with singledesign elements (either text or 
image) would be sufficient in manipulating users¡¯ perceptions 
of focused immersion during online waits. Thus, our results 
suggest that combinations of visual elements on a filler interface 
are not necessarily better in manipulating online users¡¯ 
focused immersion during waits. 

With regard to temporal dissociation, results showed that 
online users experienced significant temporaldissociation 
when presented with a filler interface but only in thecase 
when a combination of visual cues (both text and image) was 
shown on the interface. These results also suggest that visual 
cues alone (either text or image) included on filler interfaces 
are not sufficient to elicit temporal dissociation during online 
waits as compared to the no-filler interface condition. 
Further, there was no significant difference in temporal 
dissociation between users viewing a filler interface with text 
only and users viewing a filler interface with both text and 
image. However, we found a significant difference in 
temporal dissociation between the filler interface with image 
only and the filler interface with both text and image. These 
results suggest that combination of design elements on filler 
interfaces (text and image) works significantly better in 
creating temporal dissociation than single elements (image 
only). One possible interpretation is that as compared to an 
image that people can immediately comprehend, it takes more 
time and effort for people to read both the text and grasp the 
image¡¯s message, thus more temporal dissociation. 

Our results also imply that certain single design elements 
(text) may be as efficient as combination of elements (text and 
image) in distorting the time passage. One possible interpretation 
for thesuperiority of text (over image) as single 
visual cuein filler interface design could be that users may 
tend to spend more time on reading the text (which in turn 
will cause more temporal dissociation) rather than watching 
an image that is easy to grasp and comprehend (thus less temporaldissociation 
for image). In sum, image alone on filler 
interface designs may not create temporal dissociation during 
online waits. Either text alone or combination of visual cues 
(text and image) as design characteristics of filler interfaces 
can produce temporal dissociation during online waits. 

Study 3 also offered interesting results. With the inclusion of 
various filler interface design characteristics (relevant text, 
relevant image, or image motion), users seemed to experience 
more focused immersion,temporal dissociation, and 
heightenedenjoyment while waiting online. Our results 
provide theoretical justification for practitioners to design 
filler interfaces that include text or images relevant to online 
users¡¯ search tasks. At the same time, displaying moving 
images is also a good tactic to manipulate online users¡¯ 
cognitive perceptions of time during waits. 

With regardto synergy effects, our results indicated no 
interaction effect among the presence of relevant text, relevant 
image, and image motion on a filler interface. This is a very 
interesting and important finding which might work against 
the conventional thinking that more is better. In other words, 
results from this study suggest that designing a filler interface 
with any single design component (either relevant text or 
relevant image or image motion) has similar effects on users¡¯ 
cognitive absorptionperceptions. Therefore, interface 
designers can focus their design efforts (and limited 
resources) on any of the threedesignelements in order to 
manipulate PWT online. As shown in this study, combinations 
of such design elements may not necessarily be better in 
PWT manipulations than each element used alone. 

Theoretical Contributions 

Our theoretical model, controlled experiments, and structural 
equation modeling analysis in an online wait context make 
several contributions to the IS literature. First, by systematically 
investigating online wait perceptions in an e-business 
environment, we expand the theoretical boundaries of online 
wait research with a focus on PWT.Although researchers 
(e.g., Gornet al. 2004) have called for work that examined 
wait perceptions and behaviors of online users, few studies 
responded to this call, which has severely limited our understanding 
of the online wait phenomenon. We proposed and 
tested a research model and suggested ways to proactively 
manage PWT online. 

Second, we identify a Web-specific medium (i.e., filler 
interface) that has not received much attention in the IS 
literature (Benbasat 2010). Yet, filler interfaces are prevalent 
on the Internet in various contexts, including digital libraries, 
software installations, product searches, and music downloads. 
Despite their widespread use, research remains scarce 
regarding their impact on manipulating time perceptions in an 
online environment. While there are abundant HCI studies 
that address interface design in general, this study is one of 
the first to investigate specific design issues related to the 
filler interface. This study used HCI theories (i.e., competition 
for attention, visual search, and motion effect) to design 
the various filler interfaces and showed how these theories 
with roots in cognitive psychology and physiology apply to 
designs of filler interfaces that successfully manipulate 
waiting time perceptions online. This study serves as a 
starting point for further research into other design 
components of filler interfaces (e.g., progress bars, background 
colors, pop-ups, fonts, and typefaces) and their 
impacts on PWT. 

386 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


Third, we bridge a gap intheIS literature by developing a 
theoreticalmodel of online wait. Without a theoretical 
foundation, previous studies on online wait simply assessed 
objective or subjective amounts of online waiting time (e.g., 
Nah2004) or treated online wait as one factor out of many 
factors affecting online behaviors (Galletta et al. 2006; Palmer 
2002). In this study, we integrate multiple theories from 
various domains including IS (i.e., cognitive absorption 
theory) and cognitive psychology and human physiology (i.e., 
resource allocation theory and three HCI theories). Each of 
these theories has its ownsubstance yet no studies explored 
their possible synergies at either epistemological or measurement 
item levels. We triangulate these theories in order to 
identify constructs for online wait contexts and explore new 
theoretical interconnections. Our proposed model goes 
beyond previous theories in that we (1) develop a specific 
Web tool, the filler interface, as a means to manipulate PWT, 

(2) investigate various designs of filler interfaces and their 
impacts on cognitive absorption dimensions, and (3) consider 
both antecedents and consequences of PWT for overall Web 
experience and use. 
Fourth, by using a multistudy, multimethod design, this study 
proposed a theoretical model encompassing the nomological 
network of interface design, cognitive absorption, PWT, and 
overall Web site evaluations and use, and empirically validatedthe 
model with three lab experiments and structural 
equation modeling techniques. Our results provide strong 
support for the theoretical model of online wait as well as 
practical insights into management of time perceptions during 
online waits. 

Fifth, we confirm the validity of thecognitive absorption 
construct and investigate its antecedents and consequences. 
Agarwal and Karahanna (2000) found that cognitive absorption 
significantly affected technology use, but they also noted 
the instability of their measurement items. Through this 
study, we establish strong theoretical knowledge about cognitive 
absorption, hencewe set a firm basis for further studies 
in this area. By focusing on system features, we manipulated 
various filler interface designs and examined how these 
manipulations differentially affected three dimensions of 
cognitive absorption. Thus, we validate the significant 
influence of interface design as a system characteristic on 
cognitive absorption and suggest opportunities for HCI 
researchers to explore the effects of diverse Web interface 
design components on cognitive absorption dimensions. 
Furthermore, we expand the applicability of cognitive absorption 
factors in wait contexts and consider therelationship 
between cognitive absorption, PWT, and Web site appraisals. 
Therefore, this study contributes to theoretical advancement 
of cognitive absorption both in terms of its antecedents (filler 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

interface designs) and consequences (PWT and Web site 
appraisals). 

Finally, by exploring the nomological network of PWT, our 
proposed model contributes to a better understanding of 
online user behaviors during waits. We find support for the 
claim that various filler interface designs manipulate online 
users¡¯ perceptions of time which in turn hasimportant 
consequences on users¡¯ cognitive and affective appraisals and 
their intentions to use the Web site. While past research 
investigated individuals¡¯ intention to use a Web site, the focus 
was primarily on perceptions of ease of use, usefulness, and 
other innovation diffusion factors. This study is among the 
first to indicate that in an e-business environment, users¡¯ 
perceptions of PWT are a crucial consideration for positive 
attitude formation (affective appraisals) and Web site use 
intention. Thus, manipulating PWT through various interface 
designs can be an effective tool to foster positiveaffect and 
intentions. Further, the enjoyment derived from filler interface 
designs also helps cultivate positive affective evaluations 
of a Web site. 

Practical Implications 

Currently, most filler interfaces on the market appear to be 
designed largely based on designers¡¯ introspection and intuition, 
leading to irregular patterns and implementation styles. 
We investigated a wide variety of current practicesof using 
filler interfaces online and found no evidence indicating that 
rigorous and comprehensive design procedures or guidelines 
are followed. Generally,few good resources for designing 
user interfaces (e.g., Apple Computer, Inc. 2008; Shneiderman 
and Plaisant 2010). These resources that do exist provide 
rather general discussions and suggestions andmost of 
them are neither specific to filler interface design nor specific 
to various design elements that could be included on a filler 
interface. These observations demonstrate the need to design 
and test various filler interfaces in order to better guide practitioners 
and derive best practices based on theory. We present 
a summary in theappendices that includes (1) examples of 
current (best) practices for wait management (Appendix E), 

(2) descriptions of waiting screens of 11 commercial travel 
Web sites (Appendix F), and (3) comparisons of recommendations 
from best practice, observations of current practice, 
and implications/guidelines from our findings (Appendix G). 
Our experimental findings present useful practical implicationsfor 
Web designers and Web site managers regarding 
filler interface designs and their impacts on manipulating 
customers¡¯ PWT. To our knowledge, this is one of the first 
studies that provide such information to practitioners. First, 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 387 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

our findings indicate that providing users with a filler interface 
during wait for an outcome online is significantly more 
effective than not displaying a filler interface with respect to 
perceptions of temporal dissociation and focused immersion. 
This is an important implication for Web interface designers 
and e-businessmanagers that clearly supports the business 
case for implementation of a filler interface wheneveran 
unavoidable wait situation occurs online. Thus, an unchanged 
input screen is clearly inferior and a filler interface has proven 
capabilities toproduce temporal dissociation and focused 
immersion in users¡¯ interaction with the interface, thus 
altering their PWT. 

Second, our findings suggest that with respect to focused 
immersion displaying either single (text or image) or combinations 
of visual elements (text andimage) on a filler interface 
works significantly better than using no-filler interface 
during online waits. However, with respect totemporal 
dissociation, our results suggest that a combination of design 
elements (text and image) is superior when compared to the 
no-filler interface condition and certain single visual cues 
(e.g., image) but they are equally effective when compared to 
filler interfaces with text only. Thus, generally, displaying a 
filler interface with combinations of visual elements (both text 
and image) is the recommended designstrategy for causing 
temporal dissociation during online waits. This finding provides 
experimental evidence for e-business managers and/or 
user interface designers that they should consider a combination 
of visualcues on their filler interfaces in order to 
manipulate customers¡¯ time perceptions, especially temporal 
dissociation.However, if confronted with scarce resources, 
e-business managers and/or designers should consider (at a 
minimum) textual elements ontheir filler interfaces in order 
to create time distortion during online waits. 

Third, our findings provide strong evidence for inclusion of 
task-relevant information on filler interfaces. Relevant visual 
cues (text and image) on filler interfaces were shown to be 
significantly moreeffective than generic visual cues. Filler 
interfaces with such visual cues successfully manipulated 
users¡¯ perceptions of temporal dissociation, focused immersion, 
and heightened enjoyment during online waits. Thus, 
we recommend that Web sites designers use such task-
relevant elements whenever possible on their filler interfaces. 
One important implication here is also that practitioners 
should try to understand their users¡¯ goals and design filler 
interfaces around those goals. More specifically, we recommend 
displaying texts and images relevant to contexts such as 
travel destinations (e.g., for airfare booking), products and 
services (e.g., for keyword search), features and functions 
(e.g., for software installation), special offers and promotions 
(e.g., for musicdownload), and other wait situations and 
contexts. 

Fourth, our findings suggest that showing moving images on 
a filler interface is significantly better than using only a static 
image with regard to temporal dissociation, focused immersion, 
and heightened enjoyment. Thus, we recommend that 
in online wait contexts, Web sites or user interface designers 
should display multiple and dynamically changing images 
rather than a single, static image. Showing moving images on 
a filler interface tends to attract more attention fromusers and 
increase their heightened enjoyment during the wait. 

Finally, the findings regarding significant influences of short 
PWT time on customers¡¯ overall attitude toward the Web site 
andits use should encourage e-business managers and 
interface designers to spend more effort and resources on 
designing effective filler interfaces to manage customers¡¯ wait 
experiences. Filler interfaces should be well-designed to 
stimulate enjoyment and usefulness perceptions, which in turn 
correlate with traffic levels and onlinepurchases. By validating 
the effectiveness of filler interfaces to reducePWT, 
this study confirms that filler interfaces are cost-effective 
solutions to manage online wait over costly technical solutions 
including software, hardware, or network upgrades. 

Conclusion, Limitations, and Future 
Research Directions 

While our study provides important contributions to both 
research and practice of online wait management,we 
acknowledge somelimitations as precautions for general 
interpretation of our results and derived implications. 

Our study may lack external validity in the subjectsand 
setting. Weused student subjects from a large public university, 
and conducted controlled lab experiments to control for 
individual differences in computer system performance and 
network bandwidth. Although student subjects likely represent 
the target population of the phenomenon being examined, 
additional studies with actual customers in real e-business 
environments are needed to strengthen the generalizability of 
our findings. 

In addition, because we undertook cross-sectional studies, we 
gathered measures of all study constructs at the same point of 
time. Therefore, our investigation may suffer potential common 
method variance biases. Even though our common 
method variancetest reveals no significant bias, further 
research should adopt study designs that avoid this potential 
problem, such as longitudinal studies in real e-business 
environments. 

388 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


With a variety of design factors that affect PWT, this study 
considers only two design components¡ªimage and text¡ªand 
their presentation modes. Although using two design factors 
is adequatefor an initial endeavor into the effect of filler 
interface designson online waits, we do recommend that 
future studies examine the effect of other types of design 
components used on a filler interface. Examples of design 
components are a variety of busy, working, and progress 
indicators, system messages, static and animated cursors, and 
other animations. In addition, the effect of using different 
background colors, fonts and marking, various multimedia 
cues, size and sequence of the presentation cues,and providing 
wait duration information on a filler interface can be 
avenues for future investigations into customers¡¯ perceptions 
of PWT online. 

As a part of the experiments, the subjects of this study only 
conducted a single online airline ticket purchase task. 
Although this task well represents online waits, it will be ideal 
to replicate this study with different waiting tasks and contexts 
(e.g., database queries, software download/installation, 
simulation/model processing, Web e-mail file attachment) to 
examine the theoretical boundaries of our proposed model. 

As an initial inquiry into the effectsof filler interfaces and 
their designs, we did not consider other factors that may affect 
individuals¡¯ online wait perceptions including goals to visit 
the site (hedonic versus utilitarian), risk propensity (promotion 
versus prevention focused), wait expectations (high 
versus low), familiaritywith filler interfaces (more versus 
less), cultural background (monochronic versus polychronic), 
or task complexity. Researchers should take into account the 
effect of such factors on online wait perceptions in future 
research. By doing so, we can gain a better understanding of 
designing effective filler interfaces that meet users¡¯ specific 
needs in different wait contexts. 

In our experiment, we controlled thewaiting time as 16 
seconds (see footnote 3) based on 100 different travel search 
scenarios and average wait times of commercial travel sites. 
Thus, while we believea16-second wait time is adequate 
(and realistic) in our context of study, we acknowledge that 
this wait time may be context-dependent. Weconjecture that 
a wait of 16 seconds is relatively long in anonlinewait 
situation and can induce online users¡¯ cognitive absorption 
(i.e., focused immersion, temporal dissociation, and 
heightened enjoyment). Even though our results support most 
of our hypotheses concerning filler interface designs and 
online time perceptions, we do caution readers those 16 
seconds might not be an appropriate wait time in other online 
situations. 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

There may also be a need to investigate different hedonic 
designs of text, image, image motion, and other features for 
users¡¯ heightened enjoyment during online wait. In addition, 
future research should also focus on refining the measures for 
heightened enjoyment (e.g., designing new measurement 
items beyond those of perceived enjoyment and pleasant/ 
interesting perceptions). 

Finally, efforts that elaborate on the manipulation of filler 
interfaces with diverse designs also are recommended. For 
example, other filler interface designs (e.g., multitasking 
suggestion and progress prediction) for longer waiting 
scenarios (e.g., software installation, game download, and 
video/picture upload) can bestudied. In addition, as suggested 
by Shneiderman and Plaisant (2010),besides controlled 
experiments, other empirical evaluations of filler 
interface design such as expert reviews, userobservations, 
and acceptance tests can potentially provide richer information 
to design effective filler interfaces for successfully 
managing online wait. 

In summary, using a multistudy and multimethod approach, 
we critically examined the effect of filler interfaces on waiting 
time perceptions and the nomological networks associated 
with PWT. In this study, we manipulated three filler design 
conditions according to the presence and relevance of images 
andtext and image motion, and validated their differential 
contributions to online waiting perceptions. By outlining the 
antecedents and consequences of PWT, we provided a strong 
basis for a theoretical model of online waits.Overall, the 
findings demonstrate strong support for the proposed theoretical 
model and highlight the importance of usable filler interface 
designs for managing users¡¯ online waiting perceptions, 
which in turn can trigger positive Web experiences overall. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors wish tosincerely thank the senior editor, Dr. Henri 
Barki, the associateeditor, and the anonymous reviewers for their 
invaluable comments. They have contributed significantly to 
strengthen this paper. The authors also thank Dr. Jim Courtney 
whose comments were gratefully appreciated. 

References 

Agarwal, R., and Karahanna, E. 2000. ¡°Time Flies WhenYou¡¯re 
Having Fun: Cognitive Absorption and Beliefs about Information 
Technology Usage,¡± MIS Quarterly (24:4), pp. 665-694. 

Anstis, S., Verstraten, A. A. J., and Mather, G. 1998. ¡°The Motion 
Aftereffect,¡± Trends in Cognitive Science (2), pp. 111-117. 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 389 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Antonides, G., Verhoef, P. C., and Van Alast, M. 2002. ¡°Customer 
Perception and Evaluation of Waiting Time: A Field Experiment,¡± 
Journal of Customer Psychology (12:3), pp. 193-202. 

Appiah, O. 2006. ¡°Rich Media, Poor Media: The Impact of 
Audio/Video vs. Text/PictureTestimonial Ads on Browsers¡¯ 
Evaluations of Commercial Web Sites and Online Product,¡± 
Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising (28:1), pp. 
73-86. 

Apple Computer, Inc. 2008. ¡°Apple Human Interface Guidelines,¡±: 
Cupertino, CA (http://developer.apple.com/mac/library/ 
documentation/userexperience/conceptual/applehiguidelines/ 
XHIGIntro/XHIGIntro.html; accessed June 9, 2008). 

Bacon, W. F., and Egeth, H. E. 1994. ¡°Overriding Stimulus-Driven 
Attentional Capture,¡± Perception & Psychophysics (55:5), pp. 
485-496. 

Baker, J., and Cameron,M. 1996. ¡°The Effects of the Service 
Environment on Affect and Customer Perception of Waiting 
Time: An Integrative Review and Research Propositions,¡± 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science (24:4),pp. 
338-349. 

Ball, W., and Tronick, E.1971. ¡°Infant Responses to Impeding 
Collision: Optical and Real,¡± Science (171), pp. 818-820. 

Barnett,A. I., and Saponaro, A.1985. ¡°Misapplications Reviews: 
The Parable of the Red Line,¡± Interfaces (15), pp. 33-9. 

Baron, R. M., and Kenny, D. A.1986. ¡°The Moderator¨CMediator 
Variable Distinction inSocial Psychological Research: Conceptual, 
Strategic and Statistical Considerations,¡± Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology (51), pp. 1173-1182. 

Barten, S., Birns, B., and Ronch,J. 1971. ¡°Individual Differences 
in the Visual Pursuit Behavior of Neonates,¡± Child Development 
(42), pp. 313-319. 

Batra, R., and Ahtola, O. 1991.¡°Measuring the Hedonic and 
Utilitarian Sources of Consumer Attitudes,¡± Marketing Letters 
(2:2). pp. 159-170 

Bayles,M. E. 2002. ¡°Designing Online Banner Advertisements: 
Should We Animate?,¡± inProceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: Changing 
Our World, Changing Ourselves, New York: ACM, pp. 363-366. 

Benbasat, I. 2010 ¡°HCI Research: Future Challenges and 
Directions,¡± AIS Transactions on Human¨CComputer Interaction 
(2), pp. 16-21 

Block, R. A. 1990. ¡°Models of Psychological Time,¡± in Cognitive 
Models of Psychological Time, R. A. Block (ed.), Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum, pp. 1-35. 

Breckler, S. J. 1984. ¡°Empirical Validation of Affect, Behavior, 
and Cognition as Distinct Components of Attitude,¡± Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology (47), pp. 1191-1205. 

Burke, M., Hornof, A., Nilsen, E., and Gorman,N.2005. ¡°High-
Cost Banner Blindness: Ads Increase Perceived Workload, 
Hinder Visual Search, and are Forgotten,¡± ACM Transactions on 
Human¨CComputer Interaction (12:4), pp. 423-445. 

Cameron, M. A., Baker, J., Peterson, M., and Braunsberger, K. 
2003. ¡°The Effects of Music, Wait-length Evaluation, and Mood 
on a Low-Cost Wait Experience,¡± Journal of Business Research 
(56), pp. 421-430. 

Chaiken, S., and Eagly, A. H. 1983. ¡°Communication Modality as 
aDeterminant of Persuasion: The Role of Communicator 

390 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 

Salience,¡± Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (45:2), 
pp. 241-256. 

ChanLin, L. H. 2000. ¡°Attributes of Animation for Learning 
Scientific Knowledge,¡± Journal of Instructional Psychology (27), 
pp. 228-238. 

Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1990. Flow, the Psychology of Optimal 
Experience, New York: Harper Collins. 

Davenport, T. H., and Beck, J. C. 2001. The Attention Economy: 
Understanding the New Currency of Business, Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press. 

Davis, F. D. 1989. ¡°Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, 
and User Acceptance of Information Technology,¡± MIS 
Quarterly (13:3), pp. 319-340. 

Davis, M. M., and Vollmann, T.E.1990. ¡°A Framework for 
Relating Waiting Time and Customer Satisfaction in a Service 
Operation,¡± The Journal of Services Marketing (4:1), pp. 61-69. 

Dellaert, B. G. C., and Kahn, B. E. 1999.¡°HowTolerable Is 
Delay? Customers¡¯ Evaluation of Internet Web Sites after 
Waiting,¡± Journal of Interactive Marketing (13:1), pp. 41-54. 

Dennis, A. R., and Taylor, N. J. 2006. ¡°Information Foraging on 
the Web: The Effects of ¡®Acceptable¡¯ Internet Delays on 
Multi-Page Information Search Behavior,¡± Decision Support 
Systems (42:2), pp. 810-824. 

Detenber, B. H., and Reeves, B. 1996. ¡°A Bio-Informational 
Theory of Emotion: Motion and Image Size Effects on 
Viewers,¡± Journal of Communication (46:3), pp. 66-84. 

Detenber, B. H., Simons, R. F., and Bennett, G. G. 1998. ¡°Roll¡¯em! 
The Effects of Picture Motion on Emotional Responses,¡± Journal 
of Broadcasting and Electronic Media (42), pp. 112-126. 

Diao, F., and Sundar, S. S. 2004.¡°Orienting response and Memory 
for Web Advertisements,¡± Communication Research (31:5), pp. 
537-567. 

Dube-Rioux, L., Schmitt, B. H., and Leclerc, F. 1989. ¡°Consumers¡¯ 
Reactions to Waiting: When DelaysAffect the Perception of 
Service Quality,¡± in Advancesin Customer Research, T. K. Srull 
(ed.), Provo, UT: Association of Computer Research, pp. 59-63. 

Durrande-Moreau, A. 1999.¡°Waiting for Service: Ten Years of 
Empirical Research,¡± International Journal of Service Industry 
Management (10:2), pp. 171-189. 

Eagly, A., and Chaiken, S. 1993. Psychology ofAttitudes, Fort 
Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 

Fasolo, B., Misuraca, R., McClelland, G. H., and Cardaci, M. 2006. 
¡°Animation Attracts: The Attraction Effect in an On-Line 
Shopping Environment,¡± Psychology & Marketing (23:10), pp. 
799-811. 

Fishbein, M., andAjzen, I. 1975. Belief, Attitude, Intention and 
Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and Research, Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley. 

Folk, C. L., Remington, R. W., and Johnston, J. C. 1992. 
¡°Involuntary Covert Orienting isContingent on Attentional 
Control Settings,¡± Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human 
Perception and Performance (18:4), pp. 1030-1044. 

Fornell, C., and Larcker, D. 1981. ¡°Structural Equation Models 
with Unobservable Variables and Measurement Error,¡± Journal 
of Marketing Research (18:1), pp. 39-50. 

Fraisse, P. 1984. ¡°Perception and Estimation of Time,¡± Annual 
Review of Psychology (35), pp. 1-36. 


Galletta, D., Henry, R., McCoy, S., and Polak, P. 2004. ¡°Web Site 
Delays: How Tolerant are Users,¡± Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems (5:1), pp. 1-28. 

Galletta, D. F., Henry, R. M., McCoy, S., and Polak., P. 2006. 
¡°When the Wait Isn¡¯t So Bad: The Interacting Effects of Web 
site Delay, Familiarity, and Breadth,¡± Information Systems 
Research (17:1), pp. 20-37. 

Girelli, M., and Luck, S. J. 1997. ¡°Are the Same Attentional 
Mechanisms Used to Detect Visual Search Targets Defined by 
Color, Orientation, andMotion?,¡± Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
(9:2), pp. 238-253. 

Goldstein, E. B. 1989. Sensation and Perception (3rd ed.), Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth Publishing. 

Gorn, G. J., Chattopadhyay, A., Tripathi. J., and Sengupta, S. 2004. 
¡°Waiting for the Web: How Screen Color Affects Time 
Perception,¡± Journal of Marketing Research (41), pp. 215-225. 

Greenwald, A., and Leavitt, C. 1984. ¡°Audience Involvement in 
Advertising: Four Level,¡± Journal of Consumer Research (11), 
pp.581-592. 

Guynes, J. L. 1988. ¡°Impact of System Response Time on State 
Anxiety,¡± Communications of the ACM (31:3), pp. 342-347. 

Hair, J., Black, B., Babin, B., Anderson, R., and Tatham, R. 2006. 
Multivariate Data Analysis (6th edition), Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 

Heo, N. 2006. ¡°Visual Coding of Banner Animation¡ªTwo 
Mechanisms Tested: ¡®Distinctiveness¡¯ and ¡®Motion Effects,¡¯¡± in 
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the International 
Communication Association, Dresden, Germany. 

Hillstrom, A. P.,andYantis, S. 1994. ¡°Visual Motion and Attentional 
Capture,¡± Perception & Psychophysics (55:4), pp. 399-411. 

Hirst, W., and Kalmar,D.1987. ¡°Characterizing Attentional 
Resources,¡±Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
(116), pp. 63-81. 

Hong, W., Thong, J. Y. L., and Tam, K. Y. 2005. ¡°The Effects of 
Information Format and Shopping Task on Customers¡¯ Online 
Shopping Behavior: A CognitiveFit Perspective,¡± Journal of 
Management Information Systems (21:3), pp. 149-184. 

Hong,W., Thong, J. Y. L., and Tam, K. Y. 2007. ¡°How Do Web 
Users Respond to Non-Banner Ads Animation? The Effects of 
Task Type and User Experience,¡± Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology (58:10), pp. 
1467-1482. 

Hornik, J.1981. ¡°Time Cue and Time Perception Effect on 
Response to Mail Surveys,¡± Journal of Marketing Research (18), 
pp. 243-248. 

Hornik, J. 1984. ¡°Subjective and Objective Time Measures:A 
Note on the Perception of Time in Customer Behavior,¡± Journal 
of Customer Research (11), pp. 615-618. 

Hoxmeier, J. A., and DiCesare, C. 2000. ¡°System Response Time 
and User Satisfaction: An Experimental Study of Browser-Based 
Applications,¡± in Proceedings of the 6th Americas Conference on 
Information Systems, Long Beach, CA. 

Hui, M. K., and Tse, A. C. 1996. ¡°What to Tell Customers in Waits 
of Different Lengths: An Integrative Model of Service Evaluation,¡± 
Journal of Marketing (60), pp. 81-90. 

Janiszewski, C. 1998.¡°The Influence of DisplayCharacteristics on 
Visual Exploratory Search Behavior,¡± Journal of Customer 
Research (25), pp. 290-301. 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Jiang, Z.,and Benbasat, I. 2005. ¡°Virtual Product Experience: 
Effects of Visual and Functional Control of Products on 
Perceived Diagnosticity and Flow in Electronic Shopping,¡± 
Journal of Management Information Systems (21:3), pp. 111-147. 

Jiang, Z., and Benbasat, I. 2007. ¡°The Effects of Presentation 
Methods and Task Complexity on Online Customers¡¯ Product 
Understanding,¡± MIS Quarterly (31:3), pp. 475-500. 

Kahneman, D. 1973. Attention and Effort, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 

Katz, K. L.,Larson, B. M., Larson, R. C. 1991. ¡°Prescription for 
the Waiting-in-Line Blues: Entertain, Enlighten, and Engage,¡± 
Sloan Management Review (32:2), pp. 44-53. 

Kellaris, J. J., and Mantel, S. P. 1994. ¡°The Influence of Mood and 
Gender on Customers¡¯ TimePerceptions,¡± in Advances in Customer 
Research,Volume 21, C. T. Allen and D. Roedder John 
(eds.), Provo, UT : Associationfor Customer Research, pp. 
514-518. 

Kempf,D.S. 1999. ¡°Attitude Formation from Product Trial: 
Distinct Roles of Cognition and Affect for Hedonic and Functional 
Products,¡± Psychology & Marketing (16:1), pp. 35-50. 

Klapp, O. E. 1986. Overload and Boredom: Essays on the Quality 
of Life in the Information Society, New York: Greenwood Press. 

Lai,Y-L., Kuan, K. K. Y., Hui, K-L., and Liu, N. 2009. ¡°The 
Effects of Moving Animation on Recall, Hedonic and Utilitarian 
Perceptions, and Attitude,¡± IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management (56:3), pp. 468-477. 

Lamy, D., and Tsal, Y. 1999. ¡°A SalientDistractor Does Not 
Disrupt Conjunction Search,¡± Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 
(6:1), pp. 93-98. 

Lang, A. 1990. ¡°Involuntary Attention and Physiological Arousal 
Evoked by Structural Features and Emotional Content in TV 
Commercials,¡± Communication Research (17), pp. 275-299. 

Lang, A. 2000. ¡°The Limited CapacityModel of Mediated 
Message Processing,¡±Journal of Communication (50), pp. 46-67. 

LeDoux, J. E. 1995. ¡°Emotion: Clues from The Brain,¡±Annual 
Review of Psychology (46), pp. 209-35. 

Lee, Y., Ellis, M., and Chen, A. 2009. ¡°Designing Preferable 
Virtual Worlds: An Analogy of Space,¡± in Proceedings of the 
15th Americas Conference on Information Systems, San 
Francisco, CA. 

Lee, Y., and Kozar, K. 2009. ¡°Designing Usable Online Stores: A 
Landscape Preference Perspective,¡± Information and Management 
(46:1), pp. 31-41. 

Mackinlay, J. D., Robertson, G. G., and DeLine, R. 1994. 
¡°Developing Calendar Visualizers for the Information 
Visualizer,¡± in Proceedings of the 7th Annual ACM Symposium on 
User Interface Software and Technology, Marina del Rey, CA, 
pp.109-118. 

Maister, D. H. 1985. ¡°The Psychology of Waiting Lines,¡± in The 
Service Encounter, J. Czepiel,M.R. Solomon, and C. F. 
Surprenant (eds.), Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, pp. 
113-123. 

Mathwick, C., Wagner, J., and Unni, R. 2010. ¡°Computer-
Mediated Customization Tendency (CMCT) and the Adaptive 
e-Service Experience,¡± Journal of Retailing (86), pp. 11-21 

McNeil, M. R., Odell, K., and Tseng, C. H. 1991. ¡°Toward the 
Integration of Resource Allocation into a General Theory of 
Aphasia,¡± Clinical Aphasiology (21), pp. 21-39. 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 391 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Morrison,J., and Vogel, D. 1998. ¡°The Impacts of Presentation 
Visuals on Persuasion,¡± Information & Management (33), pp. 
125-135. 

Nah, F. F. 2004. ¡°A Studyof Tolerable Waiting Time: How Long 
AreWeb Users Willing to Wait?,¡± Behaviour & Information 
Technology (23:3), pp. 153-163. 

Navon, D., and Gopher, D. 1979. ¡°On the Economy of the Human 
Processing System,¡±Psychological Review (86), pp. 214-255. 

Nielsen, J. 2000. Designing Web Usability, Indianapolis, IN: New 
Riders. 

North, A.C.,and Hargreaves, D. J. 1996. ¡°Can Music Move 
People?The Effects of Musical Complexity and Silence on 
Waiting Time,¡± Environment and Behavior (31:1), pp.136-149. 

North, A. C., Hargreaves, D. J., and McKendrick, J. 1999. ¡°Music 
and On-Hold Waiting Time,¡± British Journal of Psychology (90), 
pp. 161-164. 

Novak, T. P., Hoffman, D. L., and Yung, Y. F. 2000. ¡°Measuring 
the Customer Experience in Online Environments: A Structural 
Modeling Approach,¡± Marketing Science (19:1), pp. 22-42. 

Ohman, A. 1997. ¡°The Orienting Response, Attention and 
Learning: An Information Processing Perspective,¡± in The 
Orienting Reflex in Humans, H. D. Kimmel, E. H. Van Olst and 

J. F. Orlebecke (eds.), Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 
443-471. 
Palmer, J. 2002. ¡°Web Site Usability, Design and Performance 
Metrics,¡± Information Systems Research (13:1), pp. 151-167. 
Park, C.W., and Young, S. M. 1986. ¡°Customer Response to 
Television Commercials: The Impact of Involvement and Background 
Music on Brand AttitudeFormation,¡± Journal of 
Marketing Research (23:1), pp. 11-24. 

Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., and Schumann, D. 1983. ¡°Central and 
Peripheral Routes to Advertising Effectiveness: The Moderating 
Role of Involvement,¡± Journal of Customer Research (10:2), pp. 
135-146. 

Phillips, B., and Lee, W. N. 2005. ¡°InteractiveAnimation: 
Exploring Spokes-Characters on the Internet,¡± Journal of Current 
Issues and Research in Advertising (27:1), pp. 1-17. 

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., and Podsakoff, N. P. 
2003. ¡°Common Method Biases in Behavioral Research: A 
Critical Review of the Literature and Recommended Remedies,¡± 
Journal of Applied Psychology (88), pp. 879-903. 

Pruyn, A., and Smidts, A. 1998. ¡°Effects of Waiting on the Satisfaction 
with the Service: Beyond Objective Time Measures,¡± 
International Journal of Research in Marketing (15), pp. 
321-334. 

Rajala, A. K., and Hantula, D. A. 2000. ¡°Towards a Behavioral 
Ecology of Consumption: Delay-Reduction Effects on Foraging 
in a Simulated Internet Mall,¡± Managerial and Decision 
Economics (21:3/4), pp. 145-158. 

Ravaja, N. 2004. ¡°Effects of Image Motion on a Small Screen on 
Emotion,Attention and Memory: Moving-Face Versus Static-
Face Newscaster,¡± Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic 
Media (48:1), pp.108-133. 

Reeves, B., and Nass, C. 1996. The Media Equation: How People 
Treat Computers, Television and New Media Like Real People 
and Places, New York: Cambridge University Press. 

392 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 

Reeves, B., Lang, A., Kim, E. Y., and Tatar, D. 1999. ¡°The Effects 
of Screen Size and Message Content on Attention and Arousal,¡± 
Media Psychology (1), pp. 49-67. 

Roca, J. C., Chiu, C-M., and Martinez, F. J. 2006. ¡°Understanding 
E-Learning Continuance Intention: An Extension of the Technology 
Acceptance Model,¡± International Journal of Human¨C 
Computer Studies (64), pp. 683-696. 

Rosbergen, E., Pieters, R., and Wedel, M. 1997. ¡°Visual Attention 
to Advertising: A Segment-Level Analysis,¡± Journal of Customer 
Research (24), pp. 305-314. 

Rose, G. M., and Straub, D. 2001. ¡°The Effect of Download Time 
on Customer Attitude toward the E-Service Retailer,¡± e-Service 
Journal (1:1), pp. 55-76. 

Rose, G. M., Meuter, M. L., and Curran, J.M.2005. ¡°On-Line 
Waiting: The Role of Download Time and Other Important 
Predictors on Attitude toward E-Retailers,¡± Psychology & 
Marketing (22:2), pp. 127-151. 

Rushinek, A., and Rushinek, S. F. 1986. ¡°What Makes Users 
Happy?,¡± Communications of the ACM (29:7), pp. 594-598. 

Rutkowski, A., Saunders, C., Vogel, D.,and van Genuchten, M. 
2007. ¡°Is It Already4a.m. in Your Time Zone? Focus 
Immersion and Temporal Dissociation in Virtual Teams,¡± Small 
Group Research(38:1), pp. 98-129 

Ryan, G., and Valerde, M. 2006. ¡°Waiting in Line for Online 
Services: A Qualitative Study of the User¡¯s Perspective,¡± 
Information Systems Journal (16), pp. 181-211. 

Saade, R., and Bahli, B. 2005. ¡°The Impact of Cognitive 
Absorption on Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease of Use 
in On-Line Learning: An Extension of the Technology Acceptance 
Model,¡± Information & Management (42), pp. 317-327. 

Shin, N. 2006. ¡°Online Learner¡¯s Flow Experience: An Empirical 
Study,¡± British Journal of Educational Technology (37:5), pp. 
705-720. 

Shneiderman, B., and Plaisant, C. 2010. Designing the User Interface: 
Strategies for Effective Human¨CComputer Interaction (5th 
ed.), Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley. 

Simons, R. F., Detenber, B. H., Reiss, J. E., and Shults, C. W. 2000. 
¡°Image Motion and Context: A Between- and Within-Subjects 
Comparison,¡± Psychophysiology (37), pp. 706-710. 

Simons, R. F., Detenber, B.H., Roedema, T. M., and Reiss, J. E. 
1999. ¡°Emotion Processing in Three Systems: The Medium and 
the Message,¡±Psychophysiology (36), pp. 619-627. 

Skadberg, Y. X., and Kimmel, J. R. 2004. ¡°Visitors¡¯Flow 
Experience while Browsing a Web Site: Its Measurement, 
Contributing Factors and Consequences,¡± Computers in Human 
Behavior (20), pp. 403-422. 

Spilman, L. 1999. ¡°From Elements to Perception: Local and 
Global Processing in Visual Neurons,¡± Perception (28), pp. 
1461-1492. 

Steinman,R.M., and Levinson, J. Z. 1990. ¡°The Role of Eye 
Movement in the Detection of Contrast and Spatial Detail,¡± in 
Eye Movementsand Their Role in Visual and Cognitive Processes, 
E. Kowler (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 115-160. 

Taylor, S. 1994. ¡°Waiting for Service: The Relationship between 
Delays and Evaluations of Service,¡± Journal of Marketing (58), 
pp. 56-69. 


Te¡¯eni, D. 2001.¡°Review: A Cognitive¨CAffective Model of 
Organizational Communication for Designing IT,¡± MIS Quarterly 
(25:2), pp. 251-312. 

Tellegen, A. 1982. ¡°Brief Manual for the Differential Personality 
Questionnaire,¡± unpublished manuscript, University of Minnesota. 


Thomas, B. H., and Calder, P. 2001. ¡°Applying Cartoon Animation 
Techniques to Graphical User Interfaces,¡± ACM Transactions on 
Human Computer Interaction (8:3), pp.198-222. 

Thompson, D. A., Yarnold, P. R., Williams, D. R., and Adams, S. L. 
1996. ¡°Effects of Actual Waiting Time, PWT, Information 
Delivery, and ExpressiveQuality on Patient Satisfaction in the 
Emergency Department,¡± Annals of Emergency Medicine (28:6), 
pp. 657-665. 

Todd, S., and Kramer, A. F.1994.¡°Attentional Misguidance in 
Visual Search,¡± Perception & Psychophysics (56:2), pp. 198-210. 

Tom, G., Burns, M., and Zeng, Y. 1997. ¡°Your Life on Hold: The 
Effect ofTelephone Waiting Time on Customer Perception,¡± 
Journal of Direct Marketing (11:3), pp. 25-31. 

Tom, G., and Lucey, S. 1997. ¡°A Field Study Investigating the 
Effect of WaitingTime on Customer Satisfaction,¡± Journal of 
Psychology (131), pp. 655-660. 

Trafimow, D., and Sheeran, P. 1998. ¡°Some Tests of the Distinction 
Between Cognitive and Affective Beliefs,¡± Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology (34), pp. 378-397. 

Trafimow, D., Sheeran, P., Lombardo, B., Finlay, K.A., Brown, J., 
and Armitage, C. J. 2004. ¡°Affective and Cognitive Control of 
Persons and Behaviours,¡± British Journal of Social Psychology 
(43), pp. 207-224. 

Van der Heijden, A.H. C. 1992. Selective Attention in Vision, 
London: Routledge. 

Van der Heijden, H. 2002. ¡°On the Cognitive¨CAffective Structure 
of Attitudes Toward Information Systems,¡±in Proceedings of the 
23rd International Conference on Information Systems, L. 
Applegate,R. Galliers, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), Barcelona, 
Spain, pp. 803-806

Van der Heijden, H. 2004. ¡°User Acceptance of Hedonic Information 
Systems,¡±MIS Quarterly (28:4), pp 695-704. 

Venkatesh, V., and Bala, H. 2008. ¡°Technology Acceptance Model 
3 and a Research Agenda on Interventions,¡± Decision Sciences 
(39:2), pp. 273-315. 

Venkatesh, V., Speier, C., and Morris, M. G. 2002. ¡°User Acceptance 
Enablers in Individual Decision-Making about Technology: 
Toward an Integrated Model,¡±Decision Sciences (33:2), pp. 
297-316. 

Webster, J., and Ho, H. 1997. ¡°Audience Engagementin Multimedia 
Presentations,¡± The DATA BASE for Advances in Information 
Systems (28:2), pp. 63-77. 

Weinberg, B. D. 2000. ¡°Don¡¯t Keep Your Internet Customers 
Waiting Too Long At the (Virtual) Front Door,¡± Journal of 
Interactive Marketing (14:1), pp. 30-39. 

Wolfinbarger, M., and Gilly, M. C. 2003. ¡°eTailQ: Dimensionalizing, 
Measuring and Predicting eTail Quality,¡± Journal of 
Retailing (79), pp. 183-198. 

Woodside, A. G., and Clokey, J. D. 1974. ¡°Multi-Attributes/ Multi-
Brand Models,¡± Journal of Advertising Research (14), pp. 33-52. 

Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Yantis, S., and Egeth, H. E. 1999. ¡°On the Distinction Between 
Visual Salience and Stimulus-Driven Attentional Capture,¡± 

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance (25:3), pp. 661-676. 

Yantis, S., and Jonides, J. 1984. ¡°Abrupt Visual Onsets and 
Selective Attention: Evidence from Visual Search,¡± Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 

(10), pp. 601-621. 

Yoo, C., Park,J., and MacInnis, D. J. 1998. ¡°Effects of Store 
Characteristics and in-Store Emotional Experiences on Store 
Attitude,¡± Journal of Business Research (42:3), pp. 253-263. 

Zajonc, R. B. 1980. ¡°Feelings and Thinking: Preferences Need No 
Inferences,¡± American Psychologist (35:2), pp. 151-175 

Zakay,D. 1989. ¡°Subjective Time and Attentional Resource Allocation: 
An Integrated Model of Time Estimation,¡± in Time and 
Human Cognition: A Life Span Perspective, I. Levin and D. 
Zakay (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, pp. 365-397. 

Zakay,D., and Block , R. A. 2004. ¡°Prospective and Retrospective 
Duration Judgments: An Executive-control Perspective,¡± Acta 
Neurobiologiae Experimentalis (64), pp. 319-328. 

Zakay, D., and Hornik, J. 1991. ¡°How Much Time Did You Wait 
in Line? A Time Perception Perspective,¡± in Time and Customer 
Behavior, J-C. Chebat and V. Venkatesan (eds.), Montreal: 
Universite du Quebec a Montreal. 

Zettl, H. 1973.Sight, Sound, Motion: Applied Media Aesthetics 
(3rd ed.), Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Zhang, P. 2000. ¡°The Effects of Animation on Information Seeking 
Performance on the World Wide Web: Securing Attention or 
Interfering with Primary Tasks?,¡± Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems (59:4), pp. 397-402. 

Zviran, M., Te¡¯eni, D., and Gross, Y. 2006. ¡°Does Color in E-Mail 
Make a Difference?¡± Communications of the ACM (49:4), pp. 
94-99. 

About the Authors 

Younghwa Leeis an associate professor in the College of Business 
Administration, University of Northern Iowa. He received his Ph.D.
from the UniversityofColorado at Boulder in 2005. His research 
interests are in the areas of technology acceptance, website usability, 
and IT ethics and security. Younghwa is a 2003 ICIS Doctoral 
Consortium fellow. He has published in Communications of the 
ACM, Decision Support Systems, Information & Management, Journal 
of Management Information Systems, and Journal of Organizational 
Computing and Electronic Commerce, among others. 

Andrew Chen is an associate professor of information systems at 
the School of Business at the University of Kansas. His current 
teaching and research interests include knowledge management, IT 
business value, computer interface design, databasemanagement, 
and business and Web programming applications. His research 
work appears in Decision Sciences, Decision Support Systems, 
European Journal of Operational Research, Journal of Electronic 
Commerce Research, Journal of Management Information Systems, 
and MIS Quarterly. 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 393 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Virginia Ilieis an assistant professor in the School of Management 
at California Lutheran University. She holds a Ph.D. in Information 
Systems from the University of Central Florida. Currently, her 
research interests are in the area of information technology 
implementation in healthcare organizations, including individual 
acceptance of clinical information systems. Her work has appeared 

in journals such as Decision Sciences, EuropeanJournal of 
Information Systems, Database, and International Journal of Health 
Information Systems and Informatics. She received the best paper 
awards from the Americas Conference in Information Systems and 
the International Conference on Information Systems. 

394 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2/June 2012 


RESEARCH ARTICLE RESEARCH ARTICLE 
CAN ONLINE WAIT BE MANAGED?THE EFFECT OF 
FILLER INTERFACES AND PRESENTATION MODES 
ON PERCEIVED WAITING TIME ONLINE 


Younghwa Lee 

Department of Management, College of Business Administration, University of Northern Iowa, 
Cedar Falls, IA 50614 U.S.A. {gabe.lee@uni.edu} 


Andrew N. K. Chen 

Accounting and Information Systems, School of Business, University of Kansas, 1300 Sunnyside Avenue, 
Lawrence, KS 66045 U.S.A. {achen@ku.edu} 


Virginia Ilie 

School of Management, California Luthern University, 60 West Olsen Road, 
Thousand Oaks, CA 91360 U.S.A. {ilie.virginia@gmail.com} 


MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 A1 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Appendix A 

Input Screens, Filler Interfaces, and Output Screensfor the Simulated Online Travel System 

Generic Filler Interface Condition Relevant Filler Interface Condition 
A2 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Appendix B 

Instrument Items 

Construct Items Description 
Focused 
Immersion* 
FI1 I was intensely absorbed in a filler interface while waiting to see the results. 
FI2 My attention was focused on a filler interface while I was waiting to see the results. 
FI3 I concentrated fully on a filler interface while waiting to see the results. 
FI4 I was deeply immersed in a filler interface while waiting to see the results. 
Temporal 
Dissociation 
TD1 Time appeared to go by very quickly while waiting to see the results. 
TD2 I lost track of time while waiting to see the results. 
TD3 I was unconscious of the passage of time while waiting to see the results. 
TD4 Time seemed to fly while I was waiting to see the results. 
TD5 While waiting to see the results, I forgot the passage of time 
Heightened 
Enjoyment 
HE1 Waiting for the requested results in the filler interface was: 
Pleasant 
HE2 Enjoyable 
HE3 Fun 
HE4 Exciting 
PWT 
PWT1 Your online wait to see the requested results was: Fast 
PWT2 Speedy 
PWT3 Quick 
Affective 
Appraisal 
AA1 My overall experience with the Web site was: 
Happy 
AA2 Good 
AA3 Relaxed 
AA4 Likable 
AA5 SatisfactoryCognitive 
Appraisal 
CA1 The Web site was effective for achieving the goal of my visit. 
CA2 The Web site was convenient for attaining the goal of my visit. 
CA3 I felt comfortable using the Web site to achieve the goal of my visit. 
CA4 The Web site was helpful for achieving the goal of my visit. 
Use Intention 
UI1 If I needed this service in the future, I would probably revisit this Web site. 
UI2 I would recommend this Web site to others who are interested in this service 
UI3 If I needed this service in the future, I would probably try this Web site again. 
Perceived 
Relevance** 
PR1 Image/text provided in a filler interface was informative to me. 
PR2 Image/text provided in a filler interface was valuable to me. 
PR3 Image/text provided in a filler interface did matter to me. 
PR4 Image/text provided in a filler interface was helpful to me. 
PR5 Image/text provided in a filler interface was useful to me 
Perceived 
Image Motion 
IM1 I feel that the image showing in a filler interface is in motion. 
IM2 I feel that the image showing in a filler interface is moving. 

Note: Seven-point Likert-type scales were used to measure the items above (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree) except for perceived 

relevance, which uses five-point scales. 
*In the no-filler interface condition, subjects did not see a filler interface and thus we could not directly use the same items to measure ¡°focused 
immersion on the filler interface.¡± Instead, we used items to measure ¡°focused immersion on waiting¡± (e.g., I was intensely absorbed in the waiting 
while waiting to see the results). After gathering the data, we reverse coded the items for the no-filler interface condition before conducting our 
ANOVA tests. The derived scores for both the no-filler and the filler interface conditions represented the degree of distracted attention from waiting 
itself. 
**For pretests of perceived relevance and image motion, we did not include the wording ¡°in a filler interface¡± in items. 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 A3 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Appendix C 

Pretests for Study 3 

Independent Variables 

In order to develop the treatment conditions for the relevance oftext and images, we first recruited 15 subjects who had at least 1 year of usage 
experience with travel Web sites and had visited the destination city (Las Vegas) atleast once. After explaining the purpose of our study, we 
asked them to identifythree highlyrelevant texts/images and three generic (i.e., low relevant) texts/images pertaining to the search outcome 
(e.g., Las Vegas). The operational definition of relevance is rooted in visual search theory, the extent to which filler design components (e.g., 
textorimage) are perceived as being pertinent to the search tasks. After sorting and regrouping their inputs, we identified 13texts and 17 
images. Four doctoral students examined these results and selected two highly relevant texts (e.g., ¡°Masquerade Show at Rio ¨C A Show in the 
SKY! What an exotic Carnival with fantasy floats gliding above the crowd to an orchestration of music, dancers and plenty of FUN!¡±), two 
generic texts (e.g., ¡°TravelDepot always strives to offer the best price and flight selection for customers like you. Please wait while we are 
searching for your flights. Thank you very much.¡±), five high relevant images,1and five generic images. The same 15 subjects then evaluated 
the relevance of these selected text passages and images on five relevance scales (McKinney etal. 2002). That is, each subject evaluated the 
relevance-level of each image/text by using items such as ¡°Information (images) provided in the filler interface was informative to me¡± 
(Cronbach¡¯s ¦Á= .872). According to the relevance rankings of the images and text, we derived one highly relevant text, one generic text, five 
highly relevant images, and five generic images. As we show in Table C1, our subjects notedsignificantdifferences on their perceived 
relevance between relevant and generic images and text. 

Based on motion effect theory, image motion was operationalized as a rapidly changing image slideshow representing the illusion of movement 
(ChanLin 2000). Images were classified into two experimental conditions: moving and static. We fixed the waiting time to 16 seconds (see 
footnote 3 in the paper) and created five different filler interfaces. For example, in the one-image-in-sixteen-seconds condition (static image), 
onlyone image appeared during the 16-second wait period. In the five-images-in-sixteen-seconds condition, five different images appeared 
sequentially during the 16-second wait period. The five highly relevant images identified earlier by these subjects were used in these interface 
designs. The same 15 subjects assessed image motion for each one of these five filler interface conditions using two perceived image motion 
items (e.g., ¡°I feel that the image showing in a filler interface is in motion¡±) (Cronbach¡¯s ¦Á = .754). The results of the ANOVA test indicated 
that subjects perceived significant differences in image motion across the five screen manipulations. A post hoc test (see Table C2) also 
indicated significant differences between all conditions, except between the four images in 16 seconds and 5 images in 16 seconds condition 
(Tukey HSD: mean difference = -.05, SE = .17,p > .05).We also performed another ANOVA test with less relevant images and found the 
same results. From these results, we selected the one-image-in-sixteen-seconds condition as the static condition and the four-images-in-sixteenseconds 
condition as the motion condition to test the effect of image motion on online wait perceptions. 

Table C1. Pretest of Study 3: Descriptive Statistics oGeneric Images and Text Conditions 
f ¡°Perceived Relevance¡± for Relevant VersusRelevance Description Mean S.D. F-test DF Sig. 
Text 
Relevant Las Vegas hotel & famous show 
information 5.57 0.503 
333.057 (1,28) P<0.001 
Generic Travel site motto 3.42 0.402 
Image 
Relevant Main strip hotels and recent shows 
in Las Vegas 5.22 0.600 
1140.837 (1,148) P<0.001 
Generic Flight attendance, meal, cabin 2.44 0.405 

*Five perceived relevance items were used to calculate mean and standard deviation. A seven-point Likert-type scale was used to measure the 
items (1 = Strongly disagree¡­ 7 = strongly agree) 

1We need five high and low relevant images to design filler interfaces and investigate the effect of static versus moving images. 

A4 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Table C2. Pretest of Study 3: Descriptive Statistics and Comparisons of ¡°Perceived Image Motion¡± for 
alternatives of Image Motion 
Filler Interface (J) Filler Interface Mean Difference (I ¨C J) Sig. 
1 (Mean = 1.800, SD = .455) 
One image was shown during 16 seconds 
2 (Mean = 3.125) -1.325 .000 
3 (Mean = 4.143) -2.343 .000 
4 (Mean = 5.033) -3.233 .000 
5 (Mean = 4.800) -3.000 .000 
2 (Mean = 3.125, SD = .341) 
Two images in sixteen seconds 
Image changes every 8 seconds 
1 (Mean = 1.800) 1.325 .000 
3 (Mean = 4.143) -1.018 .000 
4 (Mean = 5.033) -1.908 .000 
5 (Mean = 4.800) -1.675 .000 
3 (Mean = 4.143, SD = .663) 
Three images in sixteen seconds 
Image changes every 5.3 seconds 
1 (Mean = 1.800) 2.343 .000 
2 (Mean = 3.125) 1.018 .000 
4 (Mean = 5.033) -0.890 .001 
5 (Mean = 4.800) -0.657 .003 
4 (Mean = 5.033, SD =.611 ) 
Four images in sixteen seconds Image 
changes every 4 seconds 
1 (Mean = 1.800) 3.233 .000 
2 (Mean = 3.125) 1.908 .000 
3 (Mean = 4.143) 0.890 .001 
5 (Mean = 4.800) 0.233 .999 
5 (Mean = 4.800, SD = .592) 
Five images in sixteen seconds 
Image changes every 3.2 seconds 
1 (Mean = 1.800) 3.000 .000 
2 (Mean = 3.125) 1.675 .000 
3 (Mean = 4.143) 0.657 .003 
4 (Mean = 5.033) -0.233 .999 

*Two perceived image motion items were used to calculate mean and standard deviation. A seven-point Likert-type scale was used to measure 
the items (1 = Strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree) 

Dependent Variables 

We used the same measures from Study 1 to assess temporal dissociation and focused immersion, and included yet another variable, heightened 
enjoyment. As discussed in the hypotheses section, in addition to focused immersion and temporal dissociation,users may also perceive 
enjoyment when theysee interface design objects that provide informational and visual support for completing their tasks or moving objects 
(Hong et al. 2005). Heightened enjoyment was measured using four items from Agarwal and Karahanna (2000) (seeAppendix C). An 
exploratory study with 38 business school students who have used online travel sites was conducted for these dependent variables. All measures 
showed appropriate levels of convergent and discriminant validity (Eigenvalue for the three constructs were all greater than 1; all factor loading 
scores were greaterthan0.728; and each item grouped well with its own construct). Cronbach¡¯s alpha values were all greater than 0.929 
indicating appropriate reliability. 

References 

Agarwal, R., and Karahanna, E. 2000. ¡°Time Flies When You¡¯re Having Fun; Cognitive Absorption and Beliefs about Information 

Technology Usage,¡± MIS Quarterly (24:4), pp. 665-694. 
ChanLin, L. H. 2000. ¡°Attributes of Animation for Learning Scientific Knowledge,¡± Journal of Instructional Psychology (27), pp. 228-238. 
Hong, W., Thong, J. Y. L., and Tam, K. Y. 2005. ¡°The Effects of Information Format and Shopping Task on Customers¡¯ Online Shopping 

Behavior: A Cognitive Fit Perspective,¡± Journal of Management Information Systems (21:3), pp. 149-184. 
McKinney, V., Yoon, K., and Zahedi, F. M. 2002. ¡°The Measurement of Web-Customer Satisfaction: An Expectation and Disconfirmation 

Approach,¡± Information Systems Research (13:3), pp. 296-315. 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 A5 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Appendix D 

Path Coefficient and Model Fit Comparisons 

Table D1. Path Coefficient Comparison 
DV IV AA-PWT CA-PWT AA-UI CA-UI PWT-UI 
PWT . 
TD -.125 -.099 -.126 -.125 -.123 
PWT . 
HE -.374 -.347 -.374 -.374 -.372 
PWT . 
FI -.388 -.442 -.388 -.388 -.385 
AA . 
PWT -.385 -.351 -.389 -.372 -.370 
AA . 
HE .401 .432 .423 .417 .420 
CA . 
PWT -.453 -.440 -.434 -.436 -.446 
CA . 
AA .320 .343 .356 .345 .333 
CA . 
HE -.049 -.057 -.070 -.081 -.055 
UI . 
CA .369 .369 .335 .392 .963 
UI . 
AA .385 .387 .819 .646 .892 

*Bold represents significant path coefficients at p < 0.05. 

Table D2. Model Fit Comparison 
Model CMIN DF P CMIN/DF GFI AGFI NFI CFI RMSEA 
AA-PWT 771.940 323 .000 2.390 .861 .826 .938 .963 .063 
CA-PWT 745.083 324 .000 2.300 .864 .830 .940 .965 .061 
AA-UI 730.576 323 .000 2.262 .867 .832 .941 .966 .060 
CA-UI 737.470 324 .000 2.276 .866 .832 .941 .966 .060 
PWT-UI 745.394 325 .000 2.294 .864 .830 .940 .965 .060 

A6 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Appendix E 

Summary of Practices for Wait Management 

Context Best Practices Source 
Wait 
online 
A macro will perform a Wait for Web Page in Netscape 7.1 by watching an area on the browser¡¯s 
window that changes color when a Web page is loading and then wait for that color to return to 
normal. 
Netscape 
Wait 
page 
A few articles mention about a simple ¡°Please Wait ¡­¡± page or how to program a component 
(e.g., a progress bar) to show the percentage of completion or progress of the page loading. 
MSDN (Microsoft 
Development Network) 
Wait 
page 
Show a simple wait message on a wait page. ASP.NET WaitPage 
Framework 
Wait 
message 
Selected content such as product information and announcements is provided during waiting time 
of an Internet session. In one implementation, the process implemented by the waiting time 
message program of the invention involves monitoring a user node to identify a web site access 
request, accessing a previously stored message set, selecting a message from the message set 
and displaying or playing back the selected message. The message set and particular messages 
may be selected based on user information (e.g., demographic, psychographic, or product 
preference information), information regarding the expected waiting time or other information. 
Messages are thereby provided during waiting time that would otherwise be essentially wasted 
from the perspective of an ordinary Internet user. 
US Patent 5,996,007 ¨C 
Method for Providing 
Selected Content during 
Waiting Time of an 
Internet Session 
Wait 
display 
In a method of displaying advertising and communicating computer operation during a wait 
period, a plurality of images is displayed during the wait period in a predetermined sequence as 
part of an animation that indicates that the wait period is proceeding. Advertising information is 
integrated with the plurality of images. 
US Patent 6,304,852 ¨C 
Method of Communicating 
Computer 
Operation during a Wait 
Period 
Wait 
display 
Traffic light countdown, crosswalk countdown, crosswalk animation Multiple cities in multiple 
countries 
Wait 
display 
It keeps the user informed during the upload process. While uploading files the user is kept in the 
know with several indicators, from the percentage of the file that has been uploaded to the factors 
that may dictate the speed of the upload. Even though the user is waiting, a feeling of 
accomplishment can be felt when the file upload is in the process of completion. 
VirusTotal Web site 
Wait 
display 
They present how much time is left before the advertisement is over ¨C reducing frustration 
produced by waiting for ads and giving the user an understanding of the time frame left before 
they can see what they came for. 
Hulu Web site, ESPN 
Web site 
Wait 
page 
When users upload videos and photos to their Facebook, they are given a status window in a 
new window. This status window shows an image caption which shows which photo or video is 
currently being uploaded. As the thumbnails of your images flicker before your eyes you see 
progress being made. In addition there is a text notification section which tells your user what is 
going on. This text information allows the user to understand the process and see progress be 
made as well. Finally, there is a status bar. Just was we see when loading other applications this 
bar moves farther to the left the closer we are to being done. All of the indicators provided by 
Facebook are developed to inform users what is going on during their wait to help provide a 
better user experience. 
Facebook 
Wait 
page 
Discuss how to use busy indicator, working indicator, system messages, progress indicator, static 
wait cursors, animated cursors, and wait animations at three different wait situations (levels, 
lengths) ¨C perceptual, dialog, and cognitive. 
SAP Design Guide ¨C 
Waiting at the Computer: 
Busy Indicators and 
System Feedback 
Wait 
design 
Provide information on screens to create a more relaxing and inviting environment which will 
decrease perceived wait times. 
Show helpful reminders, facility news, and industry information to keep your audience entertained 
and informed while they wait. 
Decrease the perceived wait times of your clients by highlighting your products and services 
while they wait. 
Show specials, seasonal information, or helpful reminders that keep your communication up-todate, 
helpful, and relevant to the audience. 
RoninCast ¨C Wireless 
Ronin Technologies 
Wait 
design 
CastOven and HappyPrinter are two examples that exploiting waiting time. They use video, light, 
and background music to make waiting time to entertain and augment the experience. 
CastOven and 
HappyPrinter 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 A7 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Appendix F 

Summary and Descriptions of Waiting Screens 

Table F1. Summary of Waiting Screens of Eleven Travel Sites 
Site 
Background 
Color Logo Image Text Image Motion Position 
11 travel booking 
sites 
Blue ¨C 6 
White ¨C 2 
Red ¨C 1 
Grey ¨C 1 
Green ¨C 1 
Yes ¨C 11 
(small and 
medium 
size) 
Yes ¨C 6 (all 
irrelevant) 
No ¨C 5 
Yes ¨C 11 (all 
irrelevant) 
Yes ¨C 10 (different 
varieties) 
No ¨C 1 
Middle and top-
middle ¨C 9 
Whole page ¨C 1 
Top-left ¨C 1 

Table F2. Descriptions of Waiting Screens of Eleven Travel Sites 
Site 
Background 
Color Logo Image Text Image Motion Position 
cheapOair.com White Yes (medium 
size) 
No Irrelevant (flight 
information, 
about flight 
database) 
Traditional 
progress bar 
In the middle (1/3 
size) 
CheapTickets.co 
m 
Red Yes (small) Yes (irrelevant)/ 
No (a large 
circle with ¡°No 
Booking Fee¡±) 
Irrelevant 
(slogan) 
Animated circles 
moving across as 
the progress bar 
Top middle (1/3 size) 
SmartFares.com Dodger Blue Yes (small) Yes(irrelevant)/ 
No (banner ad) 
Irrelevant (flight 
information, 
dare to 
compare, 
banner ad) 
Blinking dots 
inside a shape of a 
rectangle 
Top middle (1/4 size) 
Hotwire.com Grey Yes (in the 
shaded 
background) 
Yes(irrelevant) 
(in the shaded 
background) 
Irrelevant (flight 
information/in 
the shaded 
background) 
(Updating ¡­) 
Icon-changing 
(bed, flight, cruise) 
and dot-moving 
(after the word 
¡°Updating¡±) 
In the middle (very 
small) 
CheapAir.com Royal Blue Yes (small) No Irrelevant 
(please wait, 
etc.) 
Diamonds change 
colors across as 
the progress bar 
and texts change 
In the middle within 
an odd shape (1/3 
size) 
Expedia.com White Yes 
(medium) 
Yes (irrelevant)/ 
No (random ad 
such as 
Yosemite Park, 
Puerto Villarta, 
Travel 
protection 
plan)/(slogan) 
Irrelevant (flight 
information, 
slogan in a box) 
Circles moving 
across as the 
progress bar 
Top and middle (1/3 
size) 
Orbitz.com Blue Yes (small) No (a popup ad 
came up) 
Irrelevant 
(slogan in a big 
box) 
Three circles 
moving across as 
the progress bar 
Top and middle (1/3 
size) 

A8 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Table F2. Descriptions of Waiting Screens of Eleven Travel Sites (Continued) 
Site 
Background 
Color Logo Image Text Image Motion Position 
Travelocity.com Dark Dodger 
Blue 
Yes (small at 
the right-
bottom) 
Yes (Irrelevant, 
random ad ¨C 
Colorado, 
slogan) 
Irrelevant 
(searching, add 
a hotel ¡­, Did 
you know ¡­) 
No Top middle (1/3 size) 
Priceline.com Deep Sky Blue Yes 
(medium) 
Yes (dynamic, 
irrelevant, 
commercial 
guy) 
Irrelevant (flight 
information, 
slogan, fine 
print) 
Circles moving 
across as the 
progress bar 
Top and middle (1/3 
size) 
Tripadvisor.com Dark Pale Green Yes 
(immediate 
regular 
screen) 
No Irrelevant (flight 
information, 
searching, etc.) 
Show some 
results first and 
animation on top 
(airline logos, 
airplanes) 
Whole page 
Lowestfare.com Dark Blue Yes 
(medium) 
Yes (irrelevant, 
an airplane 
drawing) 
Irrelevant 
(searching, 
flight + hotel 
saving, fine 
print) 
Moving arrow 
across circles as 
the progress bar 
Top left (1/3 size) 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 A9 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Appendix G 

Comparison of Best Practices, Current Practices, andFiller Interface Guidelines from Our Findings 

Best Practices ¨C Recommendations 
from Previous Literature Current Practices ¨C Observations 
Our Findings ¨C Implications and 
Guidelines 
Provide a filler screen while users wait 
No specific best practices found with respect to 
providing a filler screen while users wait in the 
online environment. ¨C No recommendations 
There are some best practices for managing 
waiting time in a physical environment. 
1. RoninCast: Wireless Ronin Technologies ¨C 
Providing information on TV screens to 
create a more relaxing and inviting 
environment which will decrease perceived 
wait times. 
2. CastOven and HappyPrinter ¨C Using video, 
light, and background music to entertain 
users during waiting time and augment their 
experience. 
No clear guideline for the use of a filler 
screen ¨C No uniform use of a filler screen 
during users¡¯ wait. 
1. Hulu Web site and ESPN Web site ¨C No 
new ¡°wait page¡± is displayed. They 
present how much time is left before the 
advertisement is over on the existing 
page. 
2. Facebook ¨C When users upload videos 
and photos to their Facebook, they are 
given a ¡°status window¡± in a new 
window. 
3. Numerous major travel Web sites ¨C 
Displaying a ¡°wait page¡± with a variety 
of design. 
4. MSDN (Microsoft Development 
Network) ¨C A few articles mention about 
a simple ¡°Please Wait ¡­¡± page. 
Our findings indicate that providing a filler 
screen while users wait for their requested 
results is significantly effective than not 
displaying a filler screen with respect to 
reducing perceived waiting time. 
.Web sites or user interface designers 
should implement a filler screen 
whenever an unavoidable wait situation 
occurs. 
Design a filler screen with text and/or image 
1. Shneiderman and Plaisant (2010), 
Designing the User Interface: Strategies for 
Effective Human-Computer Interaction, and 
Apple Computer Inc. (2008), ¡°Apple Human 
Interface Guidelines¡± ¨C Designing user interface 
in general where general discussions 
and suggestions are provided and most of 
them are neither specific to filler screen 
design nor specific to various element 
designs on a filler screen. 
2. US Patent 6,304,852: Method of 
Communicating Computer Operation During 
a Wait Period ¨C In a method of displaying 
advertising and communicating computer 
operation during a wait period, a plurality of 
images is displayed during the wait period in 
a predetermined sequence as part of an 
animation that indicates that the wait period 
is proceeding. Advertising information is 
integrated with the plurality of images. 
Almost all major travel Web sites display a 
variation of filler screen while processing 
users¡¯ request. These Web sites adopt 
different content and design on their filler 
screen; however, these filler screens on 
the market appear to be designed largely 
based on designers¡¯ introspection and 
intuition, leading to irregular patterns and 
implementation styles (e.g., images and 
text, color, animation, etc.). 
1. Orbitz.com ¨C Showing text message 
(slogan) but no image. 
2. Travelocity.com ¨C Showing text message 
(e.g., searching, add a hotel ¡­, 
Did you know ¡­) and a random image 
(e.g., a place, a slogan). 
3. Expedia.com ¨C Showing text message 
(e.g., flight information, slogan in a box) 
and a random ad image (e.g., Yosemite 
Park, Puerto Villarta, travel protection 
plan). 
4. Hotwire.com ¨C Showing text message 
(flight information in the shaded background) 
and a random image. 
Our findings suggest that displaying visual 
elements (such as text or image) on a filler 
interface works significantly better than 
using no such design elements with respect 
to reducing perceived waiting time. 
.Web sites or user interface designers 
should consider adding basic visual cues 
(text or image) on their filler interfaces in 
order to manipulate customers¡¯ time 
perceptions. 

A10 MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 


Lee, Chen, & Ilie/The Effect of Filler Interfaces and Presentation Modes 

Best Practices ¨C Recommendations 
from Previous Literature Current Practices ¨C Observations 
Our Findings ¨C Implications and 
Guidelines 
Design a filler screen with relevant text 
and/or image 
1. US Patent 5,996,007: Method for Providing 
Selected Content during Waiting Time of an 
Internet Session ¨C Selected content such as 
product information and announcements is 
provided during waiting time of an Internet 
session. In one implementation, the process 
implemented by the waiting time message 
program of the invention involves monitoring 
a user node to identify a web site access 
request, accessing a previously stored message 
set, selecting a message from the 
message set and displaying or playing back 
the selected message. The message set 
and particular messages may be selected 
based on user information (e.g., demographic, 
psychographic, or product 
preference information), information 
regarding the expected waiting time or other 
information. 
Almost all major travel Web sites adopt 
different some type of text and/or image on 
their filler screen; however, these texts and 
images on filler screens are not relevant to 
users¡¯ tasks and purposes. 
1. cheapOair.com ¨C Showing generic 
(irrelevant) text message (e.g., about 
flight database) but no image. 
2. CheapTickets.com ¨C Showing generic 
(irrelevant) text message (slogan) and 
generic (irrelevant) image (a large circle 
with ¡°No Booking Fee¡±). 
3. Lowestfare.com ¨C Showing generic 
(irrelevant) text message (e.g., 
searching, flight + hotel saving, fine 
print) and generic (irrelevant) image (an 
airplane drawing). 
4. CheapAir.com ¨C Showing generic 
(irrelevant) text message (e.g., please 
wait, etc.) but no image. 
Our findings provide strong evidence for 
inclusion of task-relevant information on filler 
interfaces. Relevant visual cues (text and 
image) were shown to be significantly more 
effective than generic visual cues with 
respect to reducing perceived waiting time. 
.Web sites or user interface designers 
should use task-relevant visual cues (text 
and image) whenever possible on their 
filler interfaces to assist users¡¯ 
tasks/purposes and usage contexts such 
as travel destinations (e.g., for airfare 
booking), products and services (e.g., for 
keyword search), features and functions 
(e.g., for software installation), special 
offers and promotions (e.g., for music 
download), and other wait situations. 
Design a filler screen with multiple and 
dynamically changing images 
No specific best practices found with respect to 
providing moving images on a filler screen 
while users wait in the online environment ¨C No 
recommendations. 
There are some best practices for managing 
waiting time with busy indicators and system 
feedback. 
1. SAP Design Guide: Waiting at the Computer: 
Busy Indicators and System 
Feedback ¨C Discuss how to use busy 
indicator, working indicator, system messages, 
progress indicator, static wait 
cursors, animated cursors, and wait 
animations at three different wait situations 
(levels, lengths) ¨C perceptual, dialog, and 
cognitive. 
No clear guideline for the use of multiple 
and dynamically changing images on a 
filler screen ¨C No uniform use. 
1. Netscape ¨C A macro will perform a Wait 
for Web Page in Netscape 7.1 by 
watching an area on the browser¡¯s 
window that changes color when a Web 
page is loading and then wait for that 
color to return to normal. 
2. Priceline.com ¨C Showing texts (e.g., 
flight information, slogan, fine print) and 
dynamic images (e.g., a series of 
images of Priceline ¡°commercial guy¡±). 
Our findings suggest that showing moving 
images on a filler interface is significantly 
better than using only a static image with 
respect to reducing perceived waiting time. 
.Web sites or user interface designers 
should display multiple and dynamically 
changing images instead of just one 
static image. 

References 

Apple Computer, Inc. 2008. ¡°Apple Human Interface Guidelines,¡± Cupertino, CA (http://developer.apple.com/mac/library/documentation/ 
userexperience/conceptual/applehiguidelines/ XHIGIntro/XHIGIntro.html; accessed June 9, 2008). 

Shneiderman, B., and Plaisant, C. 2010. Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human¨CComputer Interaction (5th ed.), Boston, 
MA: Addison-Wesley. 

MIS Quarterly Vol. 36 No. 2¨CAppendices/June 2012 A11 


Copyright of MIS Quarterly is the property of MIS Quarterly & The Society for Information Management and 
its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's 
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use. 


